
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75850 ***





                               SCIENTIFIC
                                FEEDING

                                  _By_
                        MRS. DORA C. C. L. ROPER
                                  D.O.

                             SECOND EDITION

                          OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA
                        R. S. KITCHENER, Printer
                                  1914




                            Copyrighted 1914
                                   by
                          DORA C. C. L. ROPER

                          All Rights Reserved




                             ·DEDICATION·


            THESE PAGES ARE DEDICATED TO ALL WHO READ THEM,
               WITH THE EARNEST DESIRE TO MAINTAIN HEALTH
                 AND PREVENT DISEASES WHICH ARE CREATED
                        BY WRONG AND INTEMPERATE
                          EATING AND DRINKING

                                   ⁂

    Eat not to dullness;
    Drink not to elevation.

    --Benjamin Franklin




                            [Illustration]

                    Man is composed of what he has
                    assimilated from his spiritual
                          mental and physical
                                 food




                       [Illustration: CONTENTS]


                                                                    Page

Introduction                                                           7

Preface                                                                9


PART I.

Chapter I. Food. Classification and Function of Foods                 13

Chapter II. Study of Foods                                            16


PART II.

Preparation of Foods.

Table of Measures and Weights                                         43

Chapter I. Green Vegetables                                           43

Chapter II. Legumes and Meats                                         43

Chapter III. Fish, Cheese and Eggs                                 57-64

Chapter IV. Soups                                                     67

Chapter V. Cereals, Noodles and Dumplings                             76

Chapter VI. Breads, Cakes and Puddings                                84

Chapter VII. Sauces and Salad Dressings                               98

Chapter VIII. Salads                                                 104

Chapter IX. Gelatines and Toasts                                     111

Chapter X. Fruits, Puddings and Gruels                               119

Chapter XI. Fluids                                                   129


PART III.

Chapter I. Food Requirements.

Table of Food Requirements                                           139

Chapter I. 15 Sample Menus with caloric value for the average
adult.--Food for the Aged, giving 12 Sample Menus with caloric
value                                                            140-146

Chapter II. Diet during Pregnancy                                    150

Chapter III. Care and Feeding of Children, including Recipes and Menus
for Infants; Menus for the Second Period; Menus for the Third Period;
Wrong and Right Management                                           153

                            [Illustration]

                            [Illustration]

Chapter IV. Light Lunches for School Children. Nut Foods and
Sandwiches                                                           168

Chapter V. Table of Food Combinations. 143 Menus for Breakfast. What
shall we Drink for our Meals?                                        172

Chapter VI. 168 Menus for Dinner                                     177

Chapter VII. 76 Menus for Supper                                     185

Chapter VIII. Poor Man’s Bill of Fare, including: Sample Menus for one
day. Bookkeeping. Menus for 56 days, with calculations as how to feed a
Family of Five (2 adults and 3 children) on $3.50 per week and on $5.00
per week                                                             189

Menus for Thanksgiving week                                          213

Mixed Boiled Dinners                                                 214


PART IV.

Disease: Prevention and Treatment.

Chapter I. Constipation. Malaria. Suggestions for Chronic Invalids.
Tuberculosis. Prevention of Tuberculosis. The House we live in.
Treatment of Tuberculosis. Rickets. Obesity                          218

Chapter II. Care and Feeding of Convalescents. Vomiting. Diet.
Suggestive Menus. Additional Menus with caloric value                228

Table of Foods with caloric value                                    242


APPENDIX.

Chapter I. Mental Hygiene and Diet. The Immigrant. Health Hints for
Busy People                                                          245

Chapter II. Hygiene Economy and Sanitation. Preservation of Eggs.
Dishwashing. Disinfection                                            251

Table

Giving average composition of common American food products          262

                            [Illustration]




                  INTRODUCTORY NOTE TO SECOND EDITION


Before the manuscript for the first edition of “Scientific Feeding”
went to the press, it was reviewed by several presidents of Mothers’
Clubs and other women organizations; they realized that it would fill a
long-felt want in the home and a large number of advance subscriptions
were sent in.

After publication the gratifying demand for this work necessitated the
preparation of a second edition within a month.

                                              DORA C. C. L. ROPER, D. O.




                             INTRODUCTION


This is a practical and hygienic cook book for all who consider life
and health valuable. Intelligent homekeepers, nurses, managers of
institutions and factories, all who are interested in furnishing the
most nutritious food at the least cost, or wish to distribute such a
work, will find this book worth its weight in gold.

After twenty years of persistent study, combined with praccal work
as nurse and physician in private and in institutions, beginning in
Germany, I am able to-day to present this valuable work, and hope that
it may be placed in the hands of every home-maker in the country. It
is designed for the purpose of modifying the cost of living and of
eliminating, to some degree, the hardships and drudgeries of our women.
It is excellent for school feeding, and presents the keynote to health
and longevity, helping to prevent mental, physical, and moral diseases.

The great facilities for research work in the modern laboratory offer a
wide field for the study of preventive medicine and hygiene. The world
is beginning to recognize the fact that a large number of diseases are
the result of wrong conditions. Improper eating, drinking, sleeping,
unsuitable work, excess of amusement, and wrong educational systems are
to blame for a large number of germ diseases and chronic ailments.

The body is the temple of the soul, therefore the laws of hygiene
(concerning our internal and external body) are divine. Many of the
orthodox teachings and divine laws in reference to hygiene, fasting,
and feeding are a safe guide for the prevention of disease.

It has been my object to present a practical and sane method of living,
free from fads and the teachings of one-sided extremists. All natural
foods are wholesome, if properly combined, prepared, proportioned, and
selected with care to agree with the temperament, environment, age and
climatic conditions. I have devoted a special chapter to economical
menus for people of moderate means, and have endeavored to show how it
is possible to feed a family of five on a moderate sum, without injury
to health. The amount of food and the proportions agree with what is
demanded by modern standard dietaries.

A large number of cook books have been written during the last one
hundred years to tickle the palate. Much valuable time has been wasted
and many innocent victims have paid the price for the sins of gluttony,
caused by modern methods of living.

The most learned and advanced thinkers are turning their attention more
and more to scientific dietetics. The question of feeding is one of the
most important subjects our present generation has to deal with. It
is my desire that this book may contribute to this cause, and that it
may awaken thousands of mothers and daughters to appreciation of the
dignity and importance of their life work.




                                PREFACE


The human body is a wonderfully complex and mysterious establishment,
presided over by life. It is composed of the dust of the earth,
organized by creative power.

The elements composing the human body are: Oxygen, hydrogen, carbon,
nitrogen, chlorine, sulphur, phosphorus, fluorine, calcium, natrium,
magnesium, silicon, iron and potassium.

Our bodies are maintained by food, air, light, activity, rest and sleep.

The union of oxygen with one or more of these elements is called
oxidation. If the process of oxidation within our bodies goes on
rapidly we feel warm and energetic; if it goes on slowly, the degree of
heat and energy is less; in fever there is rapid oxidation; in people
who suffer with chronic diseases there is incomplete and slow oxidation.

In order to produce harmony between the elements in the body, it is not
only necessary to breathe pure air, and eat wholesome foods, but it is
equally important to have those food elements, which are taken into our
body, selected in the right quantity, quality and combination. It is
further necessary to have them prepared in the mouth by mastication and
insalivation. If this is done, the chemical affinity or combining power
of the foods is satisfied, and digestion, absorption, sanguification,
circulation, oxidation, assimilation, excretion and clorification will
go on perfectly.

In order to keep our bodies in perfect health, we must understand
their laws. The structures and functions of the body are intimately
connected, and one is dependent upon the other.

Life at the beginning is a tiny cell; as it multiplies into other
cells, it forms blood vessels, nerves, muscles, bones, lungs, liver,
brain, heart, and stomach, until the body is completed. The growth of
the body is from within, before and after birth. The natural food for
the infant is mother’s milk, the next best is the milk of a wet-nurse,
whose child is about the same age as the one to be nursed. Artificial
preparations of milk from a cow, goat or donkey is the next best.

The appearance of the teeth indicates that the feeding of solid food
can be begun. The kind of food required for the child as well as for
the adult differs with different individuals. A normal and healthy
mother will be directed by her instincts, reason and judgment to choose
the right food for herself as well as for her infant.

An old saying goes, “God created foods, the devil created the cooks.”
A few thousand years ago, when the art of cooking was in its infancy,
physicians and surgeons were not in such demand as to-day. The
preparation of foods for the average household in those days consisted
mainly of boiled cereals prepared with salt and water, boiled and
roasted meats, and baked breads. Such articles, if eaten in proper
combination with raw fruits, greens, and nuts, will keep the appetite
at the normal state. The principal victims of disease in those days
were the kings, the idle rich and the very poor. Since civilization has
progressed, and the rights of man are more equalized, the whole race
is in danger of degeneration through the invention of fashionable and
artificially prepared foods.

In this age of refinement, our teeth, which were made to last as long
as our bodies, begin to decay before we are matured. Foods are ingested
into our bodies instead of being digested. Public hygienists and
technical bacteriologists work hard, trying to prevent such diseases
as diphtheria, scarlet fever, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, and many
other infectious and epidemic diseases, resulting from unclean food and
water, and imperfect sewage systems.

Even with the purest of milk, meat, and water, we can make a filthy
garbage can of our intestinal tract by the ingestion of foods which do
not harmonize chemically, the result being decomposition. Right here we
have all the dangers of modern diseases and pus formation, resulting
in appendicitis, phlebitis, ovaritis, cancer, Bright’s disease, and
all the above mentioned diseases, without having to look further for
the garbage can on the back porch or the sewage system in the yard.
The waste products from our tables, and the excretions from our bodies
would be less dangerous to health if the selection, combination, and
preparation of our food were more natural. The excretions of properly
fed animals are not so dangerous to our health; why should ours be?

The hygienic rules as taught by the orthodox Jew in reference to the
combination and preparation of foods are wise. He is not allowed to mix
milk and meat, meat and fish, and many other articles of food which do
not combine well chemically. The Jewish methods of killing animals and
the preliminary preparations--such as the watering and salting of meats
before cooking--are also more hygienic. They eliminate part of the
toxins of the meat, which have been in close contact with the air.

Since life and personal health are generally in charge of woman, the
right place for every girl under eighteen or twenty years is at home
or in school. No young girl under this age should be allowed to enter
a profession, workshop, or business college. An occupation which by
long hours of work over-develops a certain set of muscles and nerves
before maturity, will produce an abnormal development and an unstable
temperament. Co-education at this age is also harmful, the result
being premature development, and elopement marriages, or arrested
sexual development and extreme independence, or marriage and continual
suffering, owing to physical defects and lack of knowledge of the care
of the human body, and of domestic science.

Every woman is a born nurse. How valuable would it be, then, to give
every young girl, beginning at the age of twelve, a rudimentary course
in nursing and in the care of children; in the art of selecting,
combining, and preparing foods; and in the art of housekeeping. An
industrial high school course with such technical work as is suitable
for woman’s sensitive brain would develop her brain and body in every
direction and make the future woman a healthy mother of healthy
offspring. Those muscles and nerve centers which have been well
developed during puberty will be the strongest throughout life.

The store, the factory, the office, and the business college are no
places for a girl under twenty years of age. If for some reason she has
no desire to follow her natural calling in life, there will be plenty
of time to prepare herself for other work after the age of twenty.

If a law could be enforced to compel every woman to present a
certificate of health and maturity, and a diploma of qualification when
applying for a marriage license, much unnecessary misery, disease, and
many untimely deaths could be avoided.

The feeding as well as the mental, moral and physical training of
children is the natural profession for women. Children have in them all
the possibilities for good and evil. Mistakes during this period will
affect the child throughout its life. Thousands of infants and young
children are killed every year by wrong feeding and environment. A
large percentage of brilliant and exceptional children fill the jails
and insane asylums. Idleness, stupidity, and criminal tendencies are
=diseases=, and =diseases can be avoided by right living=. Children
with hereditary weaknesses require double care and attention; but
remember the wonderful law of nature works always toward the normal;
the good tends to overcome the bad.

If the brain of a child becomes starved by the use of sweet-meats, and
clogged by the use of rich condiments and highly seasoned food, or by
an excess of starchy foods, there is always great danger, and more so,
if the child is exceptionally bright and active. A large amount of
arterial blood is sent to the brain, and if this blood contains much
waste matter, the eliminating organs will soon be overworked and all
kinds of diseases are liable to follow, such as brain fever, softening
and subluxation of bones, epilepsy, chorea, meningitis, paralysis,
tuberculosis of the lungs, bones, and mesentery.

Many young women who, through wrong food, environment and unsuitable
educational systems, have dwarfed their bodies, find motherhood a great
burden. They have to pay the penalty for the sin that is committed
on them. Their children will not be so strong, and will have less
resisting power, and their grandchildren, if there be any, will land in
the institutions for the incurable, if the careless feeding and wrong
habits are kept up by each succeeding generation. On the other hand, if
the progress of degeneration is checked by right living, the work and
time invested will be well repaid during one generation.




                               PART ONE




                              CHAPTER I.

                       “THE BLOOD IS THE LIFE.”

Its Structure and Function Depend on the Building Material.


Foods are substances which, when introduced into the system, supply the
necessary material for growth, renewal and maintenance of the vital
structures. Food is anything that nourishes.

Foods must contain the same elements found in our bodies. The body
requires a combination of different food elements in proper proportion
to produce a suitable diet. Foods are divided into five classes: water,
protein, fats, carbohydrates and mineral matters.

Air and sun are also foods, but are not generally spoken of as nutrient.


WATER.

Our bodies consist of about two-thirds water. It helps to regulate
the body processes, and supplies building material. Watery fruits and
vegetables contain pure distilled water. The amount of water required
for the average individual differs greatly. If water is added to our
foods in the cooking process, a lesser amount is required for drinking.
Wholesome, non-stimulating food will call for a normal supply of water
between meals.


PROTEINS.

These are sometimes called albumen, and they supply the body with
nitrogen, sulphur and phosphorus. They are great tissue builders;
they also furnish energy and heat, in combination with fats and
carbohydrates.

Sources of Proteins:

Legumes, lean meats, nuts, cheese, whites of eggs, fish, and the
glutens of the grains. Milk contains proteins in the right proportion
with fats and sugars to make it suitable as a food for infants. Oats,
wheat, and rye contain more protein than other grains, and if no other
protein foods are on hand, these can maintain health for a long time
without harm. (For combinations, see introduction of “Poor Man’s Bill
of Fare.”)


FATS.

They are obtained from the vegetable and animal kingdoms. They
supply heat and energy in the most concentrated form, and are also
flesh-builders. In diseased conditions, where economy of nerve force
is required, fats in combination with acids, minerals and gelatine can
form a substitute for part of the protein foods.


CARBOHYDRATES.

These are found in large percentage in cereals and in fruits which
contain stones and seeds, and in underground vegetables, including
the lighter starches, such as sago, agar agar, sea moss and gum. Milk
can serve as a carbohydrate for special conditions; being evenly
proportioned with fats and protein it contains little waste. A certain
amount of carbohydrate foods in the form of cereals is necessary in
our daily diet, as they are rich in lime and fat--yielding material
which is required for ligamentous and other elastic tissue. People who
live on fruits, greens and nuts, or on fruits, greens and meats only,
require a larger amount of protein food, in order to make up for the
loss of cereals.


MINERAL MATTER.

In an organic form, we find mineral matter in large proportions in
green leaf vegetables, small fruits and berries, bran, rye, green peas,
string beans, tomatoes, yolks of eggs and in all the outer skins of
legumes, grains and fruits. The importance of the mineral elements
in our foods has been little understood, so far. Of late, health
reformers are beginning to realize that many serious diseases, such as
tuberculosis, insanity and malnutrition, are the result of mineral
starvation. Three-fourths of these valuable minerals are removed from
our foods daily by modern milling, bleaching, and polishing of rice,
wheat, corn and all the other grains. Not alone the minerals, but
necessary volatile oils, acids, and ferments are removed by these
processes. Refined white flour and sugar have been on the market for
the last hundred years; and much time and health have been wasted with
the writing of fashionable cook books, and the manufacture of anemic
snow white cakes, crackers, biscuits and soft putrefying puddings and
desserts, prepared with skim milk, sugar and eggs. The deficiency of
minerals in these products has created an abnormal desire for salts,
spices, and chemically pure sugar, followed by an additional craving
for intoxicating beverages and liquors. The latter articles cannot
enter into the composition of perfect teeth and bone, or gray nervous
tissue; therefore, the result is premature death and many new diseases.

It is my desire to present in this book such food combinations as
perfect as can be produced from food material with our present methods
of milling and preliminary treatment. Many people have become so
delicate in structure that they cannot use coarse breads and cereals;
therefore, a variety of different cereal foods have been included.
Vegetable foods, such as are rich in minerals, have been added to the
breakfast foods in place of sugar and beverages. In order to supply
the body with the necessary amount of minerals, we must learn, to eat
greens for breakfast, until our so-called breakfast foods have improved
in quality.

All foods possess potential or latent energy. The sun is the great
positive element, and plants store up the sun’s energy. It is
transferred to us through the eating of plants and animal foods.
Through the process of oxidation this energy is set free in our bodies,
and appears as heat and muscular power. This energy contained in foods
is known as heat or fuel value, and is expressed in terms of a heat
unit or calorie. A calorie is the amount of heat necessary to raise one
kilogram of water, one degree centigrade. This is spoken of as a large
calorie, which is used in determining the energy value of food. The
small calorie is ¹⁄₁₀₀₀ of a large calorie.

The physiological fuel and energy value of the different foods is as
follows:

1 gram of Protein         yields 4 Calories
1 gram of Fat             yields 9 Calories
1 gram of Carbohydrates   yields 4 Calories

To determine the energy value of a food or combination of foods it is
necessary to know first its composition. Then determine the weight of
protein, fat, and carbohydrate in grams and multiply these weights
accordingly.




                              CHAPTER II.

                            STUDY OF FOODS.


The average homekeeper knows little of the nutritive value and chemical
composition of the food she buys. The desire to tickle the palate
enters more into the selection of food than reason or judgment. Others,
who have studied along certain lines without the fundamental training
for this work, often make greater mistakes in the selection and
combination of foods than if they had not studied the subject at all.

It is not sufficient to know just which foods are suitable to the
individual and which are harmful; it is necessary to have a fairly well
balanced diet which contains the correct proportions of protein and
non-protein elements.

The following pages present briefs on the value and chemical nature of
different foods not mentioned in recipes:


VEGETABLE FOODS.

These are divided into several classes. They are: Legumes, cereals,
roots, bulbs, tubers, leaf, flower and fruit vegetables. All plants
are made up of a mass of cells, each consisting of a membranous wall,
enclosing a gelatinous mass, in which lie imbedded the nucleus or
center of cell activity and minute grains of starch or other material
which the plant has manufactured.

In young plants these cell walls are called cellulose; later wood cells
begin to develop. The wood cells grow into fibrous material, called
woody fibre. In poorly grown or stale vegetables this woody tissue
becomes very hard and thick, and therefore is indigestible. For this
reason it is best that all green vegetables are grown quickly and
eaten while they are fresh. When fresh they will snap crisply. Peas,
green corn and string beans will cook in one-third of the time if used
directly after gathering, instead of being kept for several days before
using.


THE LEGUMES.

The legumes are rich in vegetable protein, and differ from flesh
foods on account of being richer in protein and minerals and less
stimulating. They are free from animal intoxication.


DRIED PEAS.

Green peas are richer in minerals than yellow peas, beans or lentils,
the protein being in the form of legumin and easier to digest. They are
very purifying and should be eaten freely, especially during the cold
winter or rainy season. They are a suitable food for the brain-worker
as well as for the muscular-worker, and can be prepared in many
different ways. Yellow peas are an excellent food for muscular-workers.


DRIED BEANS.

They contain more of the protein than peas, lentils or beef. They
are therefore a very rich food and should not be consumed in large
quantities. The brown, red, and black beans are richer in iron and
minerals, and are therefore more suitable in cold weather. The hulls
of all legumes are difficult to digest, therefore it is important to
soak legumes before cooking. In countries where the water is hard, it
is well to have soft water on hand for the cooking of legumes. If rain
water cannot be obtained, boil a kettle of water each day and set aside
to cool for cooking purposes. Legumes may be soaked with hot or cold
water. Green lima beans should be put to cook in boiling water without
soaking, like all green vegetables.


LENTILS.

They are rich in iron and should be used freely in cold weather. Boiled
onions are a good addition, in place of fat meat.


GREEN PEAS AND BEANS.

Green peas differ from other green vegetables. They are richer
in protein and can serve as a meat substitute during the summer.
String-beans resemble the green leaf vegetables in their composition,
but do not contain sufficient protein to serve as a meat substitute.
They are very purifying to the liver and intestines, and should be
eaten freely by people of a bilious temperament.


CABBAGE.

Cabbage is rich in minerals. It can be made very indigestible by
careless preparation. Raw cabbage is easily digested if chopped very
fine and mixed with grated potato and mayonnaise dressing. Cooked
cabbage should be treated with acid and mixed with the yolk of an egg
if it disagrees. Some people prefer sprouts to cabbage. They resemble
each other very much in composition. Cabbage contains more water and
cellulose. It is best to use only the innermost part of cabbage, if it
disagrees.


CAULIFLOWER.

This belongs to the cabbage family. It is rich in sulphur and is one
of the most easily digested vegetables, if properly prepared. If it
disagrees, treat it with acid or serve it for breakfast instead of for
dinner.


CELERY.

Celery contains valuable minerals and is soothing to the nervous
system. Celery roots are rich in fat and a healing food for people with
kidney, liver, and intestinal trouble. The green stalks of celery root
should never be thrown away. They can be tied into a bunch and cooked
with soups of meat or legumes. Celery is a very valuable food for
people with a bilious temperament.


ASPARAGUS.

This is an easily digested vegetable and resembles celery. As a food
for medicinal purposes it may be eaten raw or cooked.


CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.

They resemble each other, carrots being richer in sugar; the parsnip
contains a little gluten. They may be eaten in the raw state with good
effect.


TURNIPS.

Turnips contain some valuable minerals, but being rich in sugar and
water, they are liable to ferment in weak stomachs, especially if eaten
with lean meats, white breads or other foods, which are poor in fat.
They should not be eaten in the middle of the day by people who do
active work. If they disagree at night, they may be eaten for breakfast
in combination with fat meats or stale bread and butter. Yellow turnips
are richer in nutriment than white turnips. Raw turnips are wholesome
if they agree. Never combine turnips with other starchy foods at the
same meal, such as potatoes, rice, white flour preparations, apples or
cucumbers.


CORN.

Green corn is rich in fat and protein, and can form a perfect meal
during the summer if combined with tomatoes. Do not cook the corn if
it is agreeable raw. Canned corn should be used with care for people
with intestinal weaknesses. If used for soups it should be strained and
diluted with an equal amount of hot water before thickening.


TOMATO.

The tomato stimulates peristalsis and is a wonderful tonic for the
liver. It is one of the most perfect fruits, rich in oxalic acid and
iron, and unsurpassed as a medicinal food. It contains a vegetable
calomel and serves as a purifier for the liver in bilious conditions.
It can be prepared and combined in many different ways. It may be one
of the first articles given to a patient after an operation, serving as
a food and tonic; it counteracts the sweetish taste of the chloroform
and prevents fatty degeneration of the liver.

Whether a food is eaten raw or cooked it is important that it be ripe.
(Not ripened on the market.) For people with weak digestive organs, the
best way to serve tomatoes is in the form of sterilized strained juice
over toast in combination with milk or in the form of soup from canned
strained tomatoes. The theory that tomatoes are liable to produce
cancer is entirely unfounded. Any kind of food if eaten in excess and
wrongly combined will aid in the progress of disease, but all natural
foods rightly combined are wholesome if eaten according to needs of the
individual.

Tomatoes combine well with fatty foods,--eggs, cheese, meats and fish.


LETTUCE.

This is the most desirable greens on our tables and combines well
with almost any kind of food. Being rich in minerals and alkaloidal
extracts, it tends to render the digestive fluids alkaline and promotes
oxidation and nutrition. If lettuce is eaten in proper proportion with
other foods at the morning or noon meal, it has a sedative effect and
keeps an excitable constitution better balanced throughout the day.
People with delicate stomachs should not eat lettuce at the evening
meal. All raw salads prepared from greens and super-acid fruits are
best eaten at the beginning of the meal, or with the meat dish at the
morning or noon meal.


CUCUMBERS.

They are a valuable food and should be eaten almost daily by growing
children and anemic people, especially if much muscular work is
required. The cucumber is considered an indigestible article of food
by people with perverted appetites. The way in which the cucumber is
usually prepared in the average household renders it unfit to eat. The
extraction of the natural juice and the treatment with salt make the
cucumber tough and indigestible, and, if eaten in combination with half
a dozen other articles, it produces indigestion. Cucumbers should never
be eaten at night.


NUTS.

Nuts are high in nutritive value, and are better evenly combined
with non-protein elements than flesh foods are. They are rich in fat
and minerals, and form an ideal diet in combination with raw fruits
and greens. They are not sufficiently appreciated as a food, and
receive much unjust criticism as to their digestibility. All nuts are
wholesome. The right combination and proportion, and the time of day
when eaten, are of great importance. The kind of activity as well as
individual peculiarities have much to do with likes and dislikes or
requirements of certain foods.


ALMONDS AND BRAZIL NUTS.

These nuts feed the higher nerve centers and generate a high quality of
intelligence.


WALNUTS, PINE KERNELS AND CHESTNUTS.

These are excellent for those who wish to put on flesh. Care must be
taken not to overtax the liver. People who have been accustomed to a
large amount of bread or other starchy foods should begin with a small
amount, and substitute them for bread. If they disagree, use lemon,
cranberries, oranges or fruit salads with them. Walnuts supply the
larger nerve structures. They are well balanced in all the elements and
are excellent for people doing hard, muscular work. Sweet dried fruits
also form a good combination with nuts. Chestnuts resemble cereals on
account of being rich in starch. They contain less protein, fat and
minerals than other nuts, and therefore combine well with such foods as
supply these elements. Baked and boiled chestnuts are generally more
agreeable than raw ones. Pine nuts are rich in both protein and fat.


COCOANUTS.

They are rich in starch and fat and resemble the cereals closely.


HAZELNUTS.

They are a valuable food, but require thorough mastication.


THE PEANUT.

The peanut is a very nutritious nut, but rather difficult of digestion
for some people. It resembles beans and peas, and is sometimes classed
as a legume. Excess of nuts at one meal, or nuts which have been poorly
masticated, may cause severe disturbances of the liver and stomach. If
the teeth are poor, the nuts may be ground, but even then great care
must be exercised to insure their proper insalivation. Cooked nut foods
and all vegetarian dishes to which strained legumes, nut-butter, eggs
and other rich foods are added, should not be indulged in by people
with weak stomachs.


NUT-BUTTER.

Great care should be exercised in the preparation of foods with
nut-butter. Never spread it on bread without first diluting it with an
equal amount of water. Do not keep it on the shelf like ordinary butter
after it has been mixed with water; prepare only sufficient to last for
twenty-four hours, and keep it on ice.


FRUITS.

There are three classes of fruit: acid, sub-acid, and sweet fruits.

Fresh raw fruits, if eaten in the right proportion with other articles,
are wholesome. The habit of eating a large amount of acid fruits at
the beginning of the morning meal is not necessary. If a heavy meal
is eaten in the evening, remaining half digested in the stomach over
night and putrefying, then acid fruits will cleanse the stomach in the
morning. The better way is to go to bed with an empty stomach and there
will be no need of cleansing in the morning. People of a highly nervous
temperament should not eat the very sweet fruits at the morning or noon
meal, as at this time they are too stimulating.

Hot house fruits out of season are health destroying. Certain fruits,
such as apples, plums, tomatoes, apricots, grapes, figs, bananas
and cranberries, will keep for a long time in the natural state, if
properly preserved. Some of them can be dried and used in the winter.
Fresh fancy summer fruits are not required during the winter by healthy
individuals, neither are canned fruits, jams or jellies.

The canning of fruits during hot summer days is a health destroying
occupation and a waste of time and money. Fresh fruits prepared with
a large amount of water and sugar are little better than beer, wine
and whiskey. If such fruits are eaten with yeast bread, potatoes and a
variety of other foodstuffs, they set up fermentation and burden the
eliminating organs. A few jars of sterilized fruit juice should be
prepared and kept on hand for medicinal purposes only.

Fruits are an important article of diet, but few people know how to
use them wisely. A large percentage of deaths in young children is due
directly to the wrong use of fruits. Many forms of infantile paralysis,
intestinal disease and malnutrition in general are due to the lack of
knowledge of the scientific combination of fruits with other articles
of food, so as to furnish a wholesome meal.

Many teachers of Domestic Science and writers in monthly magazines
seem to have forgotten, entirely of what an ordinary mixed diet should
consist. Their bills-of-fare are becoming more complex all the time.
We find combinations, such as banana fritters, custard, meat, potatoes,
nuts, milk, biscuits, dates, several kinds of vegetables, puddings,
cheese, coffee, cake and ice cream, suggested for =one meal= (sometimes
less, other times more than this). Any intelligent, thinking person
must realize that such a mixture, besides being a great waste, will
turn the stomach of the strongest individual into a yeast pot. Those
with strong eliminating organs, who take plenty of out-door exercise
and recreation of some kind, may be able to throw off the excess of
poison for a long period, while others endowed with less vigor will
suffer from the effects within a short time.

People who live on cooked foods consisting mainly of meat, bread,
sugar, soups, puddings, cooked cereals, milk, etc., should realize
that they have already filled their systems with foods which contain a
large amount of water, and therefore will overburden their intestines
and kidneys by adding a liberal amount of fruits to such a dietary.
There is always great danger of fermentation and putrefaction,
especially if constipation sets in, and here we have all the dangers of
modern diseases, which begin with mal-nutrition, be it from under-or
over-feeding. Only the most perfect specimens of men and women are
safe from danger. Why? Because their instincts lead them to choose the
right articles in the right combination, and at the table they know
“when to stop,” while an individual with weak sensory nerves does not
feel the effects of satisfaction from the food until dullness, pain
or discomfort appear. It is from this latter class mostly, that we
have our health reformers, while the former class with their perfect
battery, which can turn the poorest food materials into first grade
tissue, look on us as diet cranks and faddists.

The man who ate three square meals all his life, indulged in tea,
coffee, liquor and tobacco, was never sick and lived to be 100 years
old, probably could have lengthened his years to 300, had he not been
so dangerously strong.

The menus suggested in this book are made up carefully and
scientifically, so that each individual can easily find a diet suited
to his temperament, environment, age and occupation. Nuts contain a
high percentage of protein, and therefore form an ideal dietary in
combination with fruits. Meats, eggs, cheese, cream and fish are the
next best articles suitable to combine with fruits; raw greens are an
excellent addition, but breads, puddings, sugars, beverages, mushes
and cooked vegetables are better left out at a meal if an abundance
of fruits are taken, especially at dinner, or the amount of watery
foods taken into the body during twenty-four hours will not be in the
proper proportion to the solids. Dry legumes are very rich in protein,
but being dissolved with water during the cooking process are less
suited to combine with raw fruits, especially for those suffering with
flatulence or kidney disorders. Apples, tomatoes and vegetables combine
best with legumes. Apples and tomatoes, being of the most perfect type
of foods, combine well with all classes of protein foods, including
cereals. They should be staple articles in every household. As to other
fruit combinations, study recipes and menus, and keep in mind that no
matter how valuable an article may be, excess is a poison.

Those who live mainly upon dry foods, such as uncooked cereals and
nuts, can safely make their morning and evening meal of fruits alone,
while others who live like the average, if they attempt to make a meal
of fruits alone, and continue to do active work, will soon fail in
health.


BERRIES.

All berries are rich in minerals and feed the brain cells. They contain
traces of protein. Blackberries and huckleberries are rich in volatile
oils and iron, and are of great medicinal value. They are excellent for
the evening meal in the form of gruels and drinks.

People with digestive troubles should be careful in combining raw
blackberries with other foods. They are rich in protein and may take
the place of part of the meat dish on hot summer days. They should
never be used as a dessert after a heavy meal.


STRAWBERRIES.

Strawberries are the first fruit to make their appearance in the
spring. They are rich in iron and valuable acids. As they are in
season for a long time they should not be eaten to excess, never more
than once per day. From three to eight ounces, according to age, is
sufficient for one meal. If perfectly fresh, they combine well with
fresh cream or milk. Yeast bread, red meats or legumes should not be
eaten at the same meal with strawberries. Berries which have undergone
slight decomposition should be placed in a mason fruit jar with a
little water and be sterilized. This juice will keep for several days
in a cold place and can be used for the flavoring of milk, or for
softening zwieback which is to be served with cream or milk. If the
juice has undergone fermentation reboil it before using. It may be used
for fruit puddings or fruit gruels or be mixed with other fruit juices.
In this way everything is utilized and nothing wasted.


CHERRIES.

The cherry season is short. Therefore, they should be eaten almost
daily. All varieties are wholesome. If desired, several kinds may be
mixed at one meal. They combine well with egg foods, whole wheat,
cornmeal and fish. They may be eaten at the beginning or at the end of
a meal or by themselves. People with weak stomachs should not eat them
at night.


BLACKBERRIES.

They are a valuable and nutritious fruit and can form a perfect meal
in combination with light cereal foods. They have little preservative
properties and therefore should be eaten only when perfectly fresh.
For young children or people with intestinal weakness, only the juice
should be used in the form of wine or gruels.


RASPBERRIES.

They are a light and delicious fruit. They combine well with milk, egg
foods, or nuts, and can be served morning, noon or night.


PEACHES, PEARS AND APRICOTS.

They are all three rich in sugar and cellulose, and can form a
substitute for part of the cereal foods during hot summer days. (See
recipes for Salads.)


THE PINEAPPLE.

The pineapple contains bromaline and is of medicinal value in the
treatment of certain stomach disorders. It is not a necessary article
for the table of people of moderate means.


BANANAS.

They are a very nutritious fruit and can partially replace the cereals.
If combined with green leaves, and lemon, they can form a perfect
meal. The bitter substance which is contained in the inner skin of
the banana should be scraped off with a knife and added to the bulk,
as it counteracts the sweet flavor of the banana and adds to its
digestibility. Baked bananas are not necessary for a healthy stomach.


APPLES.

They are among the most perfect of fruits. People who have difficulty
in digesting a sufficient amount of cereals should eat apples almost
daily. If raw apples disagree, they can be made agreeable by combining
them with fat meats or oil in the form of a salad. Baked apples and
apple sauce are also good, provided they are not spoiled with too much
sugar. Some apples are fibrous and muscle-feeding; others are richer in
phosphates and valuable minerals. For salads use tart apples.


GRAPES.

Grapes are a valuable fruit for the table if eaten in the right
proportion with other foods which contain fat and protein. They are
rich in sugar and tartaric acid. As a medicinal fruit they may be eaten
in large quantities by themselves.


NECTARINES.

Like the pineapple, they belong to the luxurious fruits and are adapted
for people with a large purse. They are rich in sugar and starch, with
a small amount of cellulose.


ORANGES, GRAPEFRUIT, LEMONS AND LIMES.

They all belong to the citric acid group, and are of all the fruits,
the richest in valuable acids, which in the process of digestion are
converted into salts, rendering the blood more alkaline. The latter
three should be used in greater quantities in countries near the coast
or in low and damp districts, especially during the rainy season. The
outer skin is rich in volatile oils and is useful in the preparation
of fruit-and-milk soups. The white rind is useful as a medicine, for
patients who suffer from malaria. A small amount of it chewed while
sipping a glass of fresh milk will greatly add to the digestibility
of the milk and serve as a germicide to the liver. The juice of
one-quarter of a lemon may be taken in connection with the skin of
one-half a lemon, in combination with a glass of milk. During fever,
the skin should be carefully expectorated.


FRUIT JELLIES.

If prepared from fruit juice and cane sugar only, they are powerful
stimulants and have little food value, for the reason that they arouse
the nerve cells to extreme activity and rapid oxidation. They furnish
no food for the nerve cells, and the nutritious elements in the other
food materials taken in combination with these jellies pass out of the
body without being assimilated, or produce congestion and inflammatory
conditions. Even natural stimulants, in the form of raw fruits, can
become harmful if taken, in excess, or in the wrong combinations,
unsuitable to the individual requirements. If the glycogen-making
function of the liver becomes overburdened, the result will be
diabetes, neuralgia or starch-poison.


COMPOTES OR STEWED FRUITS.

They are more wholesome and economical than jams and jellies, which are
prepared with large amounts of sugar.

They are best served with the meat dish or with some substantial
pudding. If served with sponge cake at the end of a meal, the digestive
juice becomes acid, and produces fermentation and mal-nutrition.


PLUMS.

Green, red and blue plums are all valuable fruits. The blue plum is
rich in iron, minerals, and sugar, and is, next to apples and tomatoes,
one of the most perfect fruits. It has great preserving qualities and
if picked on a dry, sunny day and placed carefully in straw in a dry,
cold place, will keep until Christmas. For combination, see menus and
salads.

People who have distress from eating raw plums should let them alone or
eat them in the dried state only.


FIGS AND DATES.

They have an average of thirty per cent water, are rich in sugar and
contain some protein and saline matter. They are an excellent food for
people who are fond of sweets. They are more wholesome than canned
summer fruits. However, they should not be indulged in during hot
summer days, or in the spring time when the brain needs relaxation.


THE WATERMELON.

This is the largest of the melon fruits, containing sugar, salts,
cellulose and distilled water. It is an excellent food during hot
weather. People who suffer from chronic kidney disorders should only
indulge in it in small quantities at a time, and never combine it with
mushy or other starchy foods. A few drops of lemon is a good addition,
in place of free salt.


MUSKMELON.

This fruit is also rich in sugar and cellulose. What has been said of
watermelon in reference to combination also applies to this fruit.


CRANBERRIES.

Cranberries, like gooseberries, currants and lemons, are purifying
to the blood and very valuable as a food in malarial districts.
Cranberries combine well with oatmeal, cornmeal, pork, chicken, turkey
and veal. Use no more sugar for the preparation than is absolutely
necessary to counteract the tart taste. Cranberry jelly prepared with
pure sugar is unwholesome. Raw cranberries and raw celery are a good
combination for salad.


CEREALS.

Cereals are the most perfect products of the vegetable kingdom, and
make fairly well balanced foods. They are deficient in fat, with the
exception of corn and oats. In the processes of milling and cooking,
cereals have been more abused than any other foods, by depriving
them of their valuable minerals, and by compounding them into soft
putrefying puddings or rich cakes. Concentrated or predigested cereals,
as advertised under the name of breakfast foods, cannot take the place
of ordinary rolled, whole, or steel cut cereals; they have lost
valuable salts and lime during the process of baking and they also
deprive the walls of the stomach of the normal stimulus, which is
necessary for thorough utilization.

Well boiled cereal foods in the form of dumplings, macaroni, noodles
or whole cereals are stimulating and heating to the whole alimentary
tract, they take longer to digest, and are more thoroughly utilized
by the system. Predigested cereals and zwieback are more suitable for
the evening meal, or at the end of the noon meal, when the body has
expended energy. Shredded wheat and zwieback may be used with benefit
for breakfast, if a sufficient amount of raw fruits or greens is eaten
with them, but if they are used in combination with other predigested
foods, such as milk or sugar, it gives the intestine nothing to do.
For the evening meal, toasted breads and cereals combine well with
such foods as supply the lack of lime, fats and minerals: cream,
fruit-gruels, yolks of eggs, gelatine, sago, milk and green foods.


WHEAT.

Wheat can be used the year around. In cooking cereals it is very
important to start with the right quantity of water, and allow each
starch granule to burst by fast boiling during the first twenty or
thirty minutes. After this, let it cook slowly for twenty or thirty
minutes longer, or until it is done. It is not necessary to cook
cereals for several hours in order to make them fit for the human
stomach. If well boiled cereals disagree, they are generally poorly
prepared and allowed to get pasty before the starch granules have
burst, or else they are combined with raw sugar and cream, which
produces fermentation.


RYE.

Rye is richer in minerals and contains less starch than wheat. It is
not superior to wheat, but it is one of the oldest and most perfect
foods, and is the staff of life to some of the healthiest and strongest
races of the old world. It is laxative, and because of this it is more
suitable for certain individuals than for others. Rye is a good winter
food; during the summer we have many valuable berries which supply the
system with certain minerals, therefore we require less of rye bread,
or rye preparations, during this time of the year.

Rye combines well with all starchy fruits and vegetables, which are
deficient in minerals, such as potatoes, pumpkins, squash, melons,
turnips, carrots, beets, bananas, cucumbers, rice and corn. It also
combines well with sweet fruits. Apples, pork, veal, lamb, cheese,
eggs, cream, milk, bacon and oily foods are all good additions to rye.
Boiled rye and starchy foods are unsuitable combinations.

Whole rye or wheat bread should never be eaten fresh. It should be kept
in a bread box, with good ventilation, in a dry place, or near the
stove. Sun dried bread is the best.


OATS.

Oats are rich in fat and lime, and like wheat and rye belong to the
most perfect foods. A fireless cooker is a convenient apparatus for the
preparation of oats and wheat. They should be thoroughly cooked for at
least half an hour before setting them into the fireless cooker.


RICE.

Rice, although low in protein and fat, is one of the most easily
digested of all cereals, and is especially suitable for brain workers
and people of sedentary habits. This book contains a large number of
different recipes for the preparation of rice.


SAGO AND TAPIOCA.

They are manufactured from certain palms and roots, and belong to
the lighter forms of cereals. They are easily digested if soaked for
several hours before cooking, and can be partially substituted for the
heavier cereals. Cornstarch, arrowroot, potato-flour and agar agar
belong to the same class. They are all valuable for the sick and for
young children.


BARLEY.

Barley is also rich in lime; it should take a more prominent place
among food substances than it does. Pearl barley should be soaked
with soft water before cooking. If it is to be strained, mash it up
thoroughly with a potato masher, and pour more boiling water over it
after the first liquid is strained off.


ANIMAL FOODS.


EGGS.

Eggs contain all the elements necessary for the building up of a young
animal; they also contain all the elements which can be found in the
human body. The eggs of hens are used most commonly. The chemical
combination of the whole egg and that of the brain and nervous system
have much in common. The white of the egg contains about eighty per
cent water, twelve of albumen, a small amount of fat and some salts.
For medicinal purposes, eggs should be fresh, directly from the nest.
Eggs are deficient in minerals and should be combined with foods which
are rich in minerals.


CHEESE.

Cheese is one of the most economical and nutritious of foods, and a
true meat substitute. To serve cheese after a dinner is a wasteful
extravagance, and dangerous to health. Cheese combines well with
bread, macaroni, potato and other cereals; raw greens are also a good
addition. Cooking or baking cheese makes it indigestible. Grated or
sliced is the best way to serve it. People who have difficulty in
digesting cheese should always combine it with raw apples, onions, or
tomatoes and lettuce, in the form of a salad. If it still disagrees,
leave out the cereals entirely at the meal, or use black bread with it.
A combination of cheese, eggs and milk in the form of a Welsh rarebit
makes a heavy and indigestible meal, and should only be indulged in by
people who are very strong, and exercise a great deal out of doors.


MEAT.

People who live almost entirely on cooked foodstuffs and white flour
bread, find meat a necessary article of food, and consume it in larger
quantities than would be necessary, if whole wheat bread and raw
fruits and greens were used. Under the present systems of forced and
improper feeding of animals, and the preservation of meats by cold
storage, flesh foods are becoming more dangerous. There is no need
for such an excess in the production of meat, except to satisfy our
habits. If human beings and animals are fed by force, they are not
healthy. Flesh, eggs and milk from animals which are fed by force, are
unwholesome and inferior in quality.

Under certain conditions and in cold climates, meat is a necessity,
therefore the feeding of animals should be under the observation of
health officers. We need quality more than quantity.

Pork, although condemned by many people as unfit for food, is a
wholesome article, if the animal is fed upon dry, substantial food.
Pork requires a longer time to digest than other meat, and therefore
it should not be eaten at the evening meal. Pork was considered as an
unclean food by the ancient Jews; perhaps the reason for this was that
the Jew’s system did not require pork, because of his constitution and
the climatic conditions. Fat pork is a specific food for the kidneys;
it is less stimulating and easier to oxidize than any other meat.

Beef is perhaps the most economical meat for family use. A good
quality of meat should contain both fat and lean. All meats should be
well soaked and washed before cooking. Cold meats are sometimes more
agreeable than hot meats.

Veal, lamb, chicken and game are all wholesome meats if eaten in
moderation and at the right time of the year. Fresh meats should not
be served oftener than once per day, or better still, three times
per week. The internal organs and glands, such as the lungs, liver,
kidneys, tongue and stomach, are very nutritious. Sausages, if prepared
from fresh, clean meat, and not highly seasoned, are cheaper and more
nourishing than canned meats, and often preferable to fresh meat,
which has hung a long time in a meat shop. The internal organs contain
much lime and organic salts, as they feed the glands of the body; they
should be well soaked before cooking, in order to drain the thick and
impure blood out of them.

Beefsteak, chops and roasts should be slightly salted before they
are cooked. Free salt sprinkled on meat, or other dry foods, before
serving, is injurious to the lining of the stomach and blood vessels;
lemon can be used instead. Many people have an abnormal craving for
salt. This is a symptom of anemia; the system lacks minerals. The only
way to supply the necessary elements is by taking salt in the organized
state in raw greens and fruits. Free salt can satisfy such craving
temporarily, but it creates an abnormal thirst. Raw apples, tomatoes
and all other acid fruits, in combination with greens, are the best
additions to meats.


FISH.

Fish is a valuable article of food. It is less stimulating than lean
meat, and easier to digest and oxidize; for this reason it can be
recommended for brain workers. It contains a large amount of phosphorus
and nitrogen, and if properly combined with foods which are rich in
minerals, such as apples, tomatoes, lemons and greens, fish is quickly
utilized. Fish and whole rye bread is also an excellent combination.
Fish being soft, it is necessary that it be thoroughly masticated. Fish
can become very dangerous as a food when not fresh.


MILK.

Milk is found indispensable in some cases of sickness, especially
in fevers. The greatest care should be exercised in getting clean,
fresh and perfect milk, and in keeping it in a cold, clean atmosphere
after delivery. Milk may be given as a food, raw, boiled, sterilized,
pasteurized, or peptonized, and can be modified with water or other
foods in many different ways. The best and most suitable method of
preparing it for the patient must be left to the attending physician.

The color of perfect milk is yellowish white, =not blue white=. Its
odor is pleasant. A drop of milk poured into a glass of fresh water
will go to the bottom if it is good milk. In order to ascertain if the
milk is alkaline, neutral or acid, put a small piece of red litmus
paper into it, and if it turns strongly blue the milk is alkaline. If
a blue litmus paper turns strongly red, the milk is acid. Perfect milk
should be neutral or slightly alkaline. After the milk has stood for
several hours it gradually becomes more acid.

Milk which is acid in reaction, or blue in color, is unfit as a food
for children and invalids. If a mother is uncertain as to the quality
of the milk she is feeding her child, she should have it examined by
the city chemist.

Milk, even if handled very carefully, contains many germs. Therefore,
on hot days it is better to sterilize the milk for an infant, even if
the child is in perfect health, or able to take raw milk. If the milk
can be obtained directly from the cow two or three times per day, it
may be given raw on those occasions. If it has stood a little while, it
may be heated quickly to 155 degrees F. over a hot fire, while stirring
it.


CERTIFIED MILK.

This is a high grade of sanitary milk which comes from special dairies,
where great care is taken to keep everything in perfect sanitary
condition. The cows are kept in perfect health and are fed upon food
which produces milk perfect in composition. There are, however, milkmen
who have principle enough to supply their customers with milk of good
character and perhaps of as high a grade as that from inspected dairies.

I have, in my practice, often come in contact with people who were
informed by their milkmen that certified milk required no boiling or
sterilization. Some people are impressed with the idea that certified
milk has already undergone some sort of preparation. The fact that in
these days milk laboratories can be found in many large cities, may
easily bring confusion of mind as to “what the milk is certified for,”
especially to those who are not acquainted with the preparation of milk
and do not know the difference between raw and sterilized milk, if they
buy it. Such instructions should be given by better authorities than
those who deliver milk, or the label should state “what the milk is
certified for.” Certified, or any other raw milk, which is over eight
hours old, is not a fit food for infants.


BOILED MILK AND CREAM FOR TABLE USE.

Put the desired amount of milk or cream, or mixed milk and cream, into
a clean saucepan, stir over a hot fire until it reaches the boiling
point or to about 200°F. Then pour into a pitcher and set in a pan
of cold water; stir until the milk is cold. Set on ice or in a cold
place for 24 hours. Milk prepared in this way is the only wholesome
kind to use in addition to boiled cereals and fruit puddings. It is
also often preferable to raw cream and milk, in combination with raw
fruits. If the milk is to be used on cereals for the morning meal, it
can be reheated or used directly after boiling. If hot milk is added to
cereals, the sugar will not be missed.

If boiled milk or cream has stood for 24 hours it has become unfit for
further use unless it is reboiled. If putrefaction has set in, boiled
milk can become more dangerous as a food than raw milk which has stood
for the same length of time; therefore careful handling of boiled milk
as well as other boiled foods is of the utmost importance. (See Chapter
on Hygiene and Economy, under Left-Overs.)

In many foreign countries it is a general custom in every household to
boil milk directly after delivery, for the infant as well as for table
use. To do differently means uncleanliness. Modern invention of coolers
and ice-boxes in every house, and delivery of milk in bottles, has
gradually done away with this custom. Many of our present generation
of house-wives are so little acquainted with practical housekeeping
that they consider food fit for use as long as it has not soured,
notwithstanding the many changes it has undergone on the pantry shelf.
Raw cream is fit for use only directly after it has left the separator.
Raw milk should not be considered fresh and wholesome for table use
longer than eight or ten hours after milking, and then only with the
most careful handling. Following this precaution, morning milk, which
is delivered during the day, should not be used raw later than five
or six o’clock in the evening. Remember that all milk begins to turn
acid as soon as it comes in contact with the air. The longer it stands
the more acid it will be, besides being laden with germs. The process
of cooking or scalding raw milk checks the fermenting processes and
renders the food more alkaline, especially if it is to be taken with
cereals or fruit puddings and gelatines.

Cooked milk is not a natural food, but neither are cooked cereals.
Raw milk is quickly digested, while boiled milk takes several hours
to digest, and so do boiled cereals. A combination of raw milk, or
cream, and cooked cereals will force the stomach to absorb the milk
immediately, while the remainder, poorly masticated and filled with
germs, will tend to produce an acid process rather than an alkaline.
If sugar is added to raw milk and cereals, the process of intestinal
fermentation is complete. If the glandular system and the eliminating
organs are strong, they will work harder in order to rid the system of
this excess of acid; but if the constitution is not able to stand the
strain of wasteful nervous expenditure, discomfort and disease will
be the result! Enlarged tonsils are often the first sign of danger.
We cannot invent customs of feeding that interfere with natural laws
without paying the penalty.


MISCELLANEOUS FOODS.


FATS.

Fats are derived from the animal and vegetable kingdom; they are rich
in carbon and hydrogen, but poor in oxygen. Emulsified fats are present
in cream, nuts and the yolks of eggs. Oleins are mainly found in oils
obtained from fruits, nuts and vegetables. Butter contains mainly
palmitin. Suet, from beef and mutton, consists of stearin and palmitin.
Lecithin is found in yolks of eggs and in some nuts; it is a highly
complex compound, and a food for the brain and nerve substance. Suet
and mutton fat contain much stearin, and are harder to digest by some
people than other fats. However, the digestibility of a food depends
much upon the individual requirements, and a little self study will
soon convince each what forms of fat are best suited to his needs. As a
rule, people of large bone structures require a greater amount of fat
in their food than those not so constructed.

Fats are changed into fatty acids and glycerine by the secretion of
the bile and pancreatic juice, and in combination with the intestinal
juices form soluble soaps. In acute diseases fats should be taken only
in the form of butter, milk, or cream, in limited quantities. Fatty
foods are beneficial for children suffering with scrofula or rickets,
and in all chronic, wasting diseases.

People who do much indoor work, or those who are not able to digest a
sufficient amount of protein or cereals, require more fats. The latter
can be made easily digestible if rightly combined and prepared in the
form of soups, warm sauces, boiled custards and mayonnaise dressing. In
this way the fat globules are equally divided in the food and can be
better emulsified than if eaten in the solid form, or in combination
with white bread or other unsuitable articles. Cream, and the lighter
nuts, combine well with sweet foods, while oils, yolks of eggs,
meat fats, and solid fats, combine well with foods which are rich in
minerals and oxygen.

People who are unable to furnish their table with expensive fats,
such as butter, olives, cream, olive oil, bacon, eggs, eel and other
delicacies, should use the cheaper forms of fats, as corn, oats,
herring, walnuts, cream-cheese, cottonseed oil, bran, leaf lard,
vegetable butter, middle rib of beef, blood and liver sausages. Meat
products, prepared from the internal organs of the animal, are rich in
lime and fat, and, if prepared from fresh meats of healthy animals,
they are often preferable to canned and cold storage products, or to
meat which hangs in a meat-shop for a week. However, every one who buys
these articles should investigate the source and manner of preparation
for himself.


SUGAR.

Artificial sugar is not a necessary article of food for the healthy
individual who is able to supply his body with fresh and dried fruits
the year round.

True candies are: figs, dates, raisins and other tropical fruits. The
delicious summer fruits are better eaten without sugar. Undoubtedly
nature did not mean for us to indulge in sweets during hot days, or
she would have provided us more plentifully with them. All the spring
fruits are tart: people who wish to improve the taste of berries add
sugar to them at the expense of health. Our forefathers, who did not
enjoy such luxuries, had better health than our present generation.
The sugar-cane in its natural state is a valuable food. It contains
gluten and minerals, such as are found in other vegetables, and if
eaten in this form it is more wholesome than refined sugar. The gluten
and minerals are destroyed by chemical processes which are necessary to
produce sugar from the cane and beet. Pure, crystalized sugar cannot
sustain life, unless it is eaten in the proper proportion, with foods
which contain gluten, minerals and fats.

Sugar which contains minerals cannot crystalize; it remains syrup,
therefore the latter is more wholesome than sugar. In order to produce
beets, which are richer in sugar and poorer in salts, certain methods
of manuring are employed. The profit gained by this method is a
financial one. The consumer is the loser.

If artificial sugar is united with cocoa or other bitter, sour,
nutritious substances it will serve as a food; therefore, sugar in
the form of a prepared food such as chocolate, gelatine and gruels is
wholesome for those who require cooked foods. If the sugar industry
were diminished, the canning and stewing of fruits would also be
diminished, and we would have fewer tea and coffee drunkards. All
this gluttony in stimulating beverages and sweet fruit sauces was
not indulged in by the masses a hundred years ago, therefore the
constitution of the average individual at that time was much stronger.

Many parents are impressed with the idea that their children require
a large amount of sweets, in order to make them grow. We cannot force
nature without paying the penalty. At maturity, we reap what has been
sown for us, or what we have sown for ourselves.


SPICES.

Spices are a species of aromatic vegetables and fruits used for the
seasoning and preservation of foods. Their flavor is pleasant and
stimulating to the mucous membrane of the mouth.

The odoriferous substances yielded from these plants are: the volatile
oils and ethers of peppermint, roses, orange flower, lavender, camphor,
lemon, bitter almond, wintergreen, cinnamon, cloves and a number of
others. They are used for perfumes, medicines, confections, and in
the art of cookery. Many of the spices used for food are dried, as
bay leaves, thyme, marjoram, vanilla beans, dried skins of lemons and
oranges. Ground spices or liquid extracts should be used sparingly.
Many of them are adulterated. Free salt and ground spices create an
abnormal desire for water and food, and they injure the mucous membrane
lining of the blood vessels and glandular structures, and obstruct the
capillaries.

People who cannot relish their food without these artificial appetizers
should fast a while, or replace them by natural stimulants, as
tomatoes, apples, lemons and greens. Few people realize the harm
that is done by the number of salt, sugar and pepper holders that are
placed on the table at every meal, to say nothing of the dozens of
boxes of ground spices that fill the kitchen shelf. A pinch of pepper
on gravies, milk soups, or other nutritious dishes, if mixed thoroughly
with the food, assists in the coagulation of soft nitrogenous foods and
prevents putrefaction, but excess of it, or if sprinkled on dry food,
is very harmful.

The best way to use spices is to buy them whole, in the fresh or dried
state, and chop, grate, or grind them when needed. Vanilla beans,
bitter almonds, bay leaves, cinnamon bark and many others may be used
whole and removed before serving.

Children’s food should never be covered with pepper or other
stimulating spices. Under our present system of living salt has become
a necessary adjunct to our food. Legumes, cereals or any other foods
which require a large amount of water for cooking need an additional
amount of salt. It should be added before the food is removed from the
fire, so that the salt will be properly dissolved and combined with
the food. Moderate amounts of preserved, salted meats and fish are
valuable as antiseptics, if combined with soft, cooked, nutritious
foods in the form of soups and gravies, or with milk foods, eggs,
cereals or legumes. Salt used in this way will not hurt the lining
of the alimentary tract and other tissues, as free salt does when it
is sprinkled on lettuce, meat, potatoes or other dry food. Never use
salted, smoked or preserved meats or fish in excess. If possible,
investigate the source and manner of preparation of preserved foods.


DESSERTS.

Desserts have only been mentioned in the form of steamed puddings,
gelatines, oranges, grapes or bread and butter in combination with
black unsweetened coffee. Artificially prepared desserts in the form
of attractive, soft puddings and other rich mixtures flatter the
palate and renew the appetite. The true enjoyment of eating is in the
satisfaction of hunger. The craving for desserts indicates a desire
to stimulate certain nerves, which force the contents of the stomach
into the intestine and destroy the digestive processes or produce
decomposition, hasten absorption, and exhilarate the brain with the
toxins hereby produced.

Those who desire to correct the habits of intoxication in themselves or
in others should consider whether the abnormal craving is for merely
physical pleasure or for the satisfaction of starved and overworked
brains and bodies, and the change should be brought about accordingly.
To drop a long acquired habit at once may prove harmless to one person
and very fatal to another.

The worn-out digestive organs need to be toned up and developed
gradually, either by stimulating fruits or fruit juices or by tonics in
the form of bran-tea and malt-coffee.

People who have vigorous appetites and strong digestive organs may eat
a few nuts at the end of the meal until the appetite has been restored
to normal. For those who like sweets, a large number of recipes have
been given for fruit salads and light cooked dishes. Many can be served
as whole meals for the evening, or in combination with milk broths or
soups.


MUFFINS AND PANCAKES.

Many people who find pancakes indigestible will do well to observe the
time when they are most agreeable. If they are made with eggs, cream,
and water, or with rich milk, and properly prepared and combined with
suitable articles, they are generally agreeable to the most sensitive
stomach.

People of sedentary habits, or those who do brain work mainly, should
not eat pancakes or muffins for breakfast.

All ingredients, as well as the vessel, should be cold. The batter
should also be made in a cold place or out of doors. The oven, the
baking pans and the oil in which the cakes are baked, should be as hot
as possible.


BREAD.

Bread made from white flour and yeast is the staff of death. Few people
realize that if they wish to use white bread as a food the proper
amount of minerals, fats and nitrogen must be added, in order to make
it a perfect food. Yeast bread, if eaten with jams and jellies in large
quantities between meals, is health destroying and dwarfs the body. It
is also unwise to eat white bread in combination with other starches,
as rice, potatoes and soft puddings. The average individual who takes
plenty of out-door exercise may get along well for years on such
mixtures and suffer no inconvenience, but people with poor eliminating
organs or chronic ailments, or those who do much indoor work, do well
to use yeast bread in moderation, especially if prepared from white
flour.

Baked and boiled cereals are more nutritious than bread. In the
fermenting process which takes place in rising bread, valuable
substances such as lime and salts are lost. It is rendered more acid,
and therefore unfit as a food for people with weak stomachs. If yeast
bread is combined with foods which render the fluids of the stomach
alkaline, it is less harmful.


SOUPS.

Many American housekeepers do not know how to prepare soups and do not
like them. The fact that people of many nations in the old world, with
smaller incomes than the average American working man, use soups daily,
once or twice, and are far superior in physical strength and endurance
to the latter, who lives mainly on beefsteak, white bread, potatoes,
sugar, tea and coffee, should convince every one that nutritious soups
are an important article of diet. Close study and persistent effort
will enable every homekeeper with small means to learn how to prepare a
soup that is palatable and nutritious. The daily use of white bread and
butter is expensive. Besides it produces diseases, imperfect bodies and
premature old age.

All who are in the habit of eating more than their systems require
and especially those who indulge in large amounts of bread at dinner,
would do well to begin their meal with a soup. Legume and cream soups
will furnish a satisfactory meal by themselves. For combinations, see
“Menus.”




                               PART TWO

                         PREPARATION OF FOODS.


TABLE OF MEASURES AND WEIGHTS.

A standard measuring cup contains 8 ounces or ¹⁄₂ pint.

1 tablespoon               = 3 teaspoons
2 tablespoons              = 1 ounce
8 tablespoons              = 4 ounces or ¹⁄₂ cup
16 tablespoons             = 8 ounces or 1 cup

All ingredients measured by the cup, tablespoon or teaspoon are
measured level.

1 pound (English weight)   = 425 grams or 16 ounces
1 pound (Metric system)    = 500  ”
2 pounds (Metric system)   = 1000 ”




                              CHAPTER I.

                           GREEN VEGETABLES.


Green vegetables furnish a large amount of easily digested
carbohydrates and contain much mineral matter in which meats and
cereals are deficient. That they add to the highest purity of our blood
has been proven by the fact that many blood and skin diseases have been
cured by the application of specific greens alone. However, no matter
how valuable an article is, it should be used according to the needs
of the individual. As vegetables also contain a large amount of water,
it is not wise for one who has to perform active mental or physical
labor to indulge in a large amount of cooked, especially underground,
vegetables at the noon meal. At this time of the day the system
requires the most nutritious foods in the form of proteid elements,
no matter whether the meal consists of cooked food, cold or warmed
over. Green peas and corn are best eaten at the noon meal, as they
are rich in proteid elements. Asparagus, tomatoes, string beans and
leaf greens are also suitable at this time of the day, provided some
nutritious food of the proteid class is served with them. For further
combinations, see “Left Overs” and Menus.

The blanching of vegetables, as advised by some authorities, will
always remove valuable constituents of the plant. The blanching and
ventilation of vegetables during the process of cooking is advised,
in order to make them more wholesome. All artificially prepared foods
will lose certain constituents through the process of cooking, and
this loss is generally made up by additional flavoring or sauces.
Vegetables which are cooked in very little water and kept well covered
(not ventilated), will lose less of their natural qualities, and
the injurious gases which do not escape by this process can be made
harmless through the addition of fats, in the emulsified form, as
sauces, the yolk of an egg, lemon or cream.

In the consumption of food, as well as the custom of dress and
education, some people have reached that stage of refinement where
degeneration begins. We cannot refine natural food without paying
the penalty for it, which means the producing of disease and the
shortening of life. The excessive use of refined sugar, alcohol and
other artificial stimulants, has produced a dislike for fatty foods
by many people, so that they refuse to eat sauces, or fat meats in
any form, the only fat they use being butter. While the latter is a
valuable food, it often cannot be assimilated by the system if spread
on white bread, or mixed with cooked vegetables; it generally serves
only as a lubricant. If butter is eaten in excess, especially in the
summer, it clogs the system. Some people prepare vegetables and soups
with melted butter for the sake of convenience. This is a waste, since
a tablespoonful of butter or other fat properly emulsified as directed
under butter sauces will often give more nutriment than one-quarter of
a pound of butter wasted by soaking into toast or other cooked foods.

The American method of cooking green vegetables in a large amount of
water and throwing it away, then seasoning them with butter and spices
and serving them with lean meat and white bread, produces a starvation
diet. In such a meal, the important mineral matter and the fats in
vegetables and whole wheat grains are left out, and are supplemented by
an excess of starches and water in the form of bread, beverages and
desserts. Additional fats should be added scientifically and combined
with foods which are rich in minerals and acids.

All vegetable water, especially that of canned or sterilized fruits
and vegetables, is very wholesome and antiseptic. Strained, sterilized
tomato, currant, gooseberry and strawberry juices are unsurpassed as
a liver medicine in some conditions. These same foods will lose their
medicinal value if stewed in an open kettle. They should be prepared in
Mason jars or cans. After opening, these fruit juices may be kept in
earthenware on ice for twelve hours, and served again. After this they
should be reboiled or sterilized, in order to check fermentation. For
the sick, the same precaution should be taken with keeping fruit juices
as with milk.

When using canned vegetables, never throw away the water, if it is
not to be used for dressing. Add it to soups or use it in place of
beverages. Pea, bean and asparagus water may be made very palatable if
cream is added. See preparation of legume teas under “Fluids.”

In preparing vegetables for the sick, the finest of all dressings is
the yolk of an egg and lemon juice, with a small amount of butter. The
fat in the yolk of the egg being emulsified in a perfectly natural
state, it feeds the mucous membrane of the entire alimentary tract and
blood vessels. Besides neutralizing the gas producing tendencies of the
foods, it aids in the digestive and assimilating processes and feeds
the nerve sheaths. In all chronic conditions, which are the result
of hardening of the arteries, a large amount of the yolk of eggs,
combined with lemon and oil, may be used. There are a few vegetables
which do not combine well with the yolk of an egg, such as turnips,
carrots, beets and onions. These contain a large amount of sulphur
and iron, which is also found in the yolk of the egg. Fat meats are
good additions to the last mentioned vegetables, except onions, which
are rich in oil themselves. If underground vegetables are served in
the form of purees, they should be mashed very fine or rubbed through
a colander; the butter which is added should not be allowed to boil.
Peas, beans, cauliflower and cabbage are most likely to disagree if
served with butter only. Butter sauces, cream sauces, yolks of eggs and
lemon are the best additions to make them agreeable.

Some people prefer vegetables cooked in oil. Those whose systems can
digest a large amount of fat will find them agreeable.


ARTICHOKES.

Wash them thoroughly and remove the outside leaves. Drop into salted
boiling water and cook for 20 or 30 minutes. Add a few drops of vinegar
to the water while boiling. Serve warm with a white sauce or let cool
and serve with French or mayonnaise dressing.


ASPARAGUS.

Wash and cut them into inch pieces until the hard part of the stem is
reached. Boil them for 20 minutes, or until tender. Serve warm with
butter, milk, cream, or egg sauce, or cold with French or mayonnaise
dressing. The asparagus may be scraped and tied into bundles when
boiling.


BEETS.

Remove the green tops and wash them carefully. Do not prick the skin,
as the juice will then escape and injure the color as well as the
flavor. Young beets will be tender in about one hour, older ones take
two to three hours. When done, peel and slice. Serve with a butter or
cream sauce, or plain, with butter and chopped parsley. For salad, cut
into slices and pour over them boiling vinegar, diluted with one-half
water. Add whole spices if desired.


MASHED BEETS.

Prepare like the above. When tender, peel and mash very fine with a
potato masher, and add butter and a few drops of lemon juice.


BEET GREENS.

Wash the tops and boil in a very little water until tender. A small
piece of salted or smoked lean meat may be boiled with them to give
them a better flavor. Chop fine and flavor with butter and lemon
juice. A brown butter sauce may be prepared from the water in which the
greens have been boiled; when done mix with the finely chopped greens,
and let it boil a second, and flavor with lemon.


ROASTED CARROTS.

Wash, scrape, and cut them lengthwise into halfs and quarters, then cut
crosswise into inch pieces or smaller. Cover with boiling water and
cook for 10 or 15 minutes, with a little salt. Drain off the water (add
to soups); brown some fat and flour, add to it soup stock, whey or the
water which was drained off, and roast the carrots in it until done.
Cover them tightly and add more fluid while roasting, if necessary.
Flavor with chopped parsley.


CARROT PUREE. No. 1.

Steam or cook the carrots with salt and as little water as possible. A
small piece of lean bacon or cornbeef may be added for flavoring. When
done, mash very fine with a potato masher. Flavor with butter and a
little pepper and parsley or lemon.


CARROT PUREE. No. 2.

Prepare like the above, and add one potato to three medium-sized
carrots. If the potatoes require less time to cook, add them when the
carrots are half done. This preparation may be especially recommended
for chronic invalids or for those who have a dislike for the sweet
flavor of the vegetable.


CREAMED CARROTS. No. 1.

Cook like carrot puree. When tender, make a butter sauce with the
water; add parsley and hot cream, if desired.


CREAMED CARROTS. No. 2.

Cook like number one, thicken with flour or corn starch, and add some
hot cream and parsley. Serve, like soup or vegetables, for breakfast or
supper, with dry whole wheat or black bread. Butter is not required at
the meal if cream is used. If the butter and cream are emulsified as in
sauces, they are more wholesome.


PEAS.

Wash the peas while in the pods, then shell. Boil the pods in a very
little water for 15 minutes, then take out and put the peas to boil in
the same water. Add a little salt and sugar when almost done. Prepare
further like creamed carrots. Some people prefer them with no dressing
except butter. Those who have difficulty in digesting starch and wish
to cut out the bread at the meal may use sauces or cream dressings with
their vegetables, especially in the winter.


MIXED PEAS AND CARROTS.

Put the peas on to boil, and when half done, add an equal amount of
carrots which have been cut into half inch pieces. Prepare with a
butter sauce like creamed carrots, and add chopped parsley. This will
afford a perfect meal for dinner in spring or summer. A few bread or
flour dumplings may be served with it. The latter should be cooked with
the peas 10 minutes before serving. Salted or smoked meats give them a
good flavor.


PEAS AND CODFISH (Saxon Dish).

Cook the peas with a very little water, and add meat broth while they
are boiling. Boil some fresh codfish in a separate saucepan, and when
done remove the skin and bones, cut into pieces and mix with the peas.
Prepare a butter sauce from the liquid remaining on the peas. Carrots
may be added.


PEAS WITH LAMB.

Boil the lamb with sufficient water to cover it. Add salt and onion.
When half done, put it to boil with the peas, which should have been
boiled with water in another saucepan for 10 minutes. When meat and
peas are done, remove the fat, thicken with flour and add the pea water
to make a butter sauce. Flavor with parsley. Use the meat broth for
soup or add the yolk of an egg or two, and serve in cups.


MIXED VEGETABLES (Leipsiger Dish).

Use asparagus tops, young French carrots, peas, and cauliflower. Cook
each vegetable separately with salt, in as little water as possible.
When done, drain the water from each and use for soup. Mix the
different vegetables in one dish and pour browned butter over them.
Serve with Lobster Curry. A butter sauce may be prepared from the
vegetable water in place of brown butter. Bread or flour dumplings may
be served with it. Lean meat is also a good combination.


CAULIFLOWER.

Cauliflower should be avoided by those who have delicate stomachs, at
the evening meal. It should be perfectly fresh and put into salted
water for an hour before cooking, in order to take out any hidden
insects. It should be boiled 20 to 30 minutes; if steamed it takes a
little longer. Flavor with salt and a little sugar while boiling. Serve
with brown or melted butter and lemon, or prepare a butter sauce with
soup stock and the yolk of an egg, or with cream. Season with pepper.
Serve with chipped beef or grated cheese for breakfast, or with lean
meat for dinner. Left over cauliflower may be baked in the oven with
cheese or bread crumbs, and served for breakfast. Tomato sauce is also
suitable as a dressing. Cold cheese is a better combination with the
latter than cream sauce or baked cheese.


STRING BEANS.

They are very purifying and should be eaten often, by people of a
bilious tendency. Select young string beans, pull off the string on
each side and break in pieces an inch long. Boil in slightly salted
water and prepare like green peas. They may be mixed with carrots. Ribs
of beef or lamb can be cooked with them as described in recipe for
peas. For other combinations, see “Boiled Mixed Dinners.”


SPINACH.

This is also a very valuable vegetable. Besides being rich in iron
and phosphates, it is laxative, and excellent as a medicinal food
for constipation. Wash it thoroughly. For a delicate stomach use the
leaves only. Steep in as little water as possible, chop very fine or
rub through a colander; season with pepper, salt, lemon and butter, or
prepare with a brown or white butter sauce from soup stock, or spinach
water. Gelatine may be used in place of soup stock by dissolving the
gelatine in the vegetable water. Smoked or salted lean meat may be
cooked with it for flavoring. Serve with eggs or lean meat.


SPINACH (Saxon Dish).

Boil in as little water as possible, and chop fine. Then chop fine some
well watered salt herring or other salt fish. Prepare the spinach with
a butter sauce made from soup stock, add the fish and serve on toast.
Dried bread crumbs or browned flour mixed with butter, without the
liquid, may be added to any of the green leaf vegetables.


MUSTARD GREENS.

Dandelions, yellow dock, horse radish tops and lettuce may be prepared
in the same manner as spinach.


OKRA.

Wash and remove the stems. Boil in salted water for 40 or 50 minutes.
Prepare with a butter or cream sauce.


STEWED CUCUMBERS.

Wash and peel them. Then cut into pieces and cook with as little water
as possible, until tender. Serve with fish or lean meat for dinner, or
with whole wheat or rye bread for breakfast.


CELERY ROOT.

Wash and boil the roots with the skins. When tender, peel them and cut
into slices. Prepare with a butter sauce made with soup stock or serve
with French dressing. Flavor with parsley.


BLACK CARROTS.

Wash and scrape. Boil in salt water to which a little vinegar has been
added. Prepare with a butter sauce, or mash fine. Serve with tongue,
croquettes or boiled beef.


EGG PLANT.

Cut in slices about an inch thick. Make a batter of eggs, salt and
flour; dip the slices of egg plant in the batter, and fry in hot fat.
Serve with lean meat, for dinner or supper, or serve with green salad
for breakfast.


STUFFED GREEN PEPPERS.

Cut off the stem end and remove the seeds. Fill the peppers with a
dressing such as is given in recipes for bread dumplings or meat
croquettes. Place them in a baking dish with two tablespoonfuls of oil
or fat; when brown add a little flour and some soup stock, cover the
dish and bake in an oven for about 50 minutes. The inner part of the
peppers may be mixed with the filling.


ONIONS.

For stewing use small or medium sized onions. Boil them in salt water,
drain off the water and serve with butter and lemon, or prepare a
butter or cream sauce. They are best eaten for breakfast or dinner with
some salted meat, and wheat or rye bread.


RAW ONIONS.

People who like onions and find they disagree on account of the strong
acids, should grate them and mix thoroughly with sauces, or French or
mayonnaise dressing.


FRIED ONIONS.

Chop the onions very fine in a wooden bowl. Then heat some butter and
oil and fry them until light brown and pour over steak or mix with
potatoes.


PARSLEY.

Chop enough to last for several days. Melt some butter and add the
parsley, and let boil up once. When cold put on ice. This saves time,
though it is best to prepare the parsley fresh for each meal.


MUSHROOMS.

Wash and dry them, then roll in flour and fry in fat until brown. Add
some soup stock and steep until done. Cover well. If the stock is too
thin, add a little browned flour; season and serve on toast.


RED CABBAGE.

Wash and cut in quarters. Mince very fine and put on to boil in a
little water; let it cook for 20 minutes in earthen ware, then add
three to five ounces of fat or oil, some vinegar, sugar, salt and
caraway seed. Let all cook for several hours. A few apples may be
cooked with the cabbage and taken out when done. The latter may be
served for breakfast. When the cabbage is done, thicken with browned
flour and let cook 10 minutes longer. Onion may be added if desired. A
piece of salt pork is also a good addition in place of oil.


WHITE CABBAGE. No. 1.

Prepare the same as red cabbage.


WHITE CABBAGE. No. 2.

Cut in quarters and boil in a little water with a small piece of lean
salted smoked meat, or without meat. When tender, drain and serve with
butter and the yolk of an egg and lemon, or with an egg sauce or tomato
sauce.


SPROUTS.

Remove the outside leaves and put to boil in a little salt water. When
tender, drain and season with butter and lemon. The yolk of an egg may
be added. A butter or egg sauce is also good.


COOKED CORN.

Remove the leaves and put in cold salt water for 30 minutes. Then boil
for 20 minutes. Corn is best when eaten raw. It is very nutritious and
will afford a perfect meal during the summer with tomato salad and
lettuce.


CANNED CORN.

Thicken the corn with flour and water. Add a small amount of hot cream
and season with salt and pepper or a few spoonfuls of tomato juice.
If no cream is desired, drain off the liquid and thicken like butter
sauce. Canned corn, being a rich and soft food, should not be mixed
with many other foods at the same meal. It is more suitable for the
morning or noon meal than for supper.


KOHLRABI.

Peel, slice thin, and stew in a very little water. When nearly done,
add some hot soup. Prepare with a butter sauce. Chop fine some green
leaves of the plant previously boiled and add. Serve with boiled beef.


VEGETABLE OYSTER.

Wash, scrape and boil in salt water until tender--about 40 minutes.
Prepare with butter, milk or cream sauce, or mash fine and fry like
potato balls. Season with lemon or pepper.


TURNIP PUREE.

Prepare like carrot puree. Cook with as little water as possible.


ROASTED TURNIPS.

Prepare the same as roasted carrots. They combine well with mutton.


FRIED PARSNIPS.

Scrape, wash and cut in slices, lengthwise. Boil in salt water for 5
minutes, then drain and fry in smoking hot fat. They can be turned
in batter if desired. They may be fried without cooking, like sweet
potatoes.


KALE.

This is a desirable vegetable in cold weather. It is purifying and very
valuable during the rainy season, in malarial districts. Remove the
leaves from the stems, wash and boil in salt water, using as little
water as possible. Chop very fine and prepare like spinach. A little
smoked meat may be added.


SQUASH.

If young and tender it does not require peeling. Wash, cut into small
pieces and steam. When done, mash fine and season with salt, pepper and
cream, or butter, and a few drops of lemon. It may be cut in slices and
fried in oil, or dipped in butter and fried like egg plant.


TOMATO PUREE.

Cut some fresh, firm tomatoes into several pieces. Cook in a double
boiler with as little water as possible. Rub through a sieve with a
spoon or potato masher. From 3 to 6 ounces of thick puree is sufficient
at a meal, for the average adult. For medicinal purposes, tomatoes may
be eaten in large quantities.


CANNED STEWED TOMATOES. No. 1.

They are more wholesome if not cooked. Place a can of tomatoes in hot
water to heat, drain off the liquid, and serve with meat, fish, eggs or
cheese. The liquid may be kept for soup.


STEWED TOMATOES. No. 2.

Heat a can of tomatoes, thicken with flour and water, and let boil 10
minutes. Add some butter and flavor with onion, and small amount of
sugar if desired.


STEWED TOMATOES. No. 3.

Prepare as number two, thicken with bread or cracker crumbs, instead of
flour.


STEWED TOMATOES. No. 4.

Heat a can of tomatoes. Then heat some butter and oil in a flat
saucepan, thicken with mixed flour, flavor with onion, add the tomatoes
gradually, and let boil a few minutes.


STUFFED TOMATOES.

Wash the tomatoes and cut off the upper part with a sharp knife. Scrape
out the pulp and fill the tomatoes with cold chopped meat mixed with
onion and mayonnaise dressing. Garnish with lettuce and serve with
bread and butter, or as an entree.


SAUERKRAUT.

Wash the sauerkraut in cold water several times. People with sensitive
stomachs should boil it for a short time. Then drain off the water
and put on to boil again. If no meat is served with it, use a few
tablespoons of oil, lard, butter, or goose fat. Add onions and a little
sugar or some apples for flavoring. Cook from one to two hours. Then
add a little flour dissolved in cold water, or two raw grated potatoes.
Remove the apples before serving. The latter may be eaten for breakfast
or supper. If the onions disagree, remove them before serving. Good
combinations with sauerkraut are: Pea puree, pork, bacon, liver,
liver-pudding, white fish, and oysters stewed or fried.


CABBAGE ROLLS.

Wash some large cabbage leaves. Fill them with finely chopped left-over
meat, mixed with eggs. (See recipe for croquettes.) Then tie the rolls
together with a string. Steam in a shallow dish with as little water as
possible. Serve with an egg sauce. Flavor with mace.


POTATOES.

Potatoes consist mainly of starch and water. They are more expensive
than wheat, rye, oats, barley and corn. They should not be eaten
oftener than once a day, or better three times a week. People who do
hard physical or mental work should not eat potatoes at the noon meal.
Fat meats, eggs, fish and greens combine well with potatoes; if they
are served with lean meat, some fatty substance in the form of butter,
cream or gravy should be eaten with them. Fried potatoes are not
wholesome. The best way to prepare them is to boil or bake them in the
skins, or boil or mash them in cream or buttermilk.


POTATO SALAD.

Boil or steam some potatoes with their jackets on. When done, peel
and slice them into a deep bowl while warm; then sprinkle over them a
little salt, pepper, and finely chopped or grated onion, and pour over
them some boiling hot vinegar diluted with one-half water and mixed
with melted butter or oil. Cover with a saucer and shake well; let
stand for twenty or thirty minutes. If there is too much liquid, pour
off some and mix the remainder with mayonnaise dressing and chopped
parsley, if desired.


SWEET POTATOES.

Boil the potatoes in the jackets, let cool, peel, slice, and fry in
one-half butter and one-half oil. Serve with cranberry sauce, lettuce,
and lean meat.

Sweet potatoes may be peeled and sliced in the raw state, and fried in
half oil and half butter. Serve as above. They are very suitable for
breakfast.


CREAMED POTATOES.

Select small potatoes and boil in the skins. Add some salt. When done,
peel and cut into thin slices. Bring some milk to a boil, and thicken
with corn starch dissolved in water, or prepare a butter sauce with
butter, flour and milk. Add the potatoes and some finely chopped
parsley. Serve with fish or salted preserved meat.


CRUST POTATOES.

Use small, imported German potatoes. Boil with the skins, peel and
turn in yolk of eggs and rye nuts; fry in oil and butter. Serve with
sprouts, or spinach and meat.


STEAMED POTATOES.

Peel small sized potatoes, wash and put into a steamer or colander.
When done pour into a dish, and mix with chopped parsley and fresh
butter. Serve with fish.


FRENCH FRIED POTATOES.

Peel and cut into long strips or thin slices. Put into salt water on
ice for half an hour. Fry in boiling oil.


MASHED POTATOES.

Peel, wash, and boil or steam the potatoes; when done, mash fine, and
add some hot cream or cold buttermilk, and a little salt, also a piece
of butter.


MASHED SWEET POTATOES.

Prepare the same as white potatoes.


POTATO BALLS.

Beat 2 eggs with an egg beater, mix with one cup of left-over mashed
potatoes, shape into balls and fry in hot fat. Serve with bacon, fish,
or sausage, for breakfast.


POTATO PUDDING.

Prepare the same as potato balls. Put the mass into a pudding dish and
cover with rye nuts, grated cheese, or a beaten egg mixed with rye
nuts, and bake half an hour.


POTATO AND APPLE PUREE.

Prepare as for mashed potatoes. Use apple sauce in place of milk or
cream, mix well and add a liberal piece of butter. Serve with sauer
roast, veal cutlets or sausage. It is good for breakfast with bacon.




                              CHAPTER II.

                          LEGUMES AND MEATS.


BAKED BEANS.

Pick over the beans carefully, wash and soak them in soft water as
directed in chapter on legumes. If the beans are to be cooked with fat,
scald or parboil the meat first, add it to the beans after they have
cooked for about an hour. If the beans require long cooking, take the
meat out when it is tender. When the beans are tender, pour them into
a bean-pot or round pan, cover the top with part of the fat meat cut
into slices, or pour some cooking oil over the beans, and add a few
whole onions. Bake for about an hour. Onions and fat meat eaten at the
same meal are liable to disagree, therefore serve the onions at another
time, or use them only for flavoring purposes.


BAKED LENTILS OR PEAS.

Prepare in the same manner as baked beans. They require less fat for
cooking, and are more palatable if served without meat than are beans.
Onions are rich in oil, therefore if plenty of onions are used, the
meat is not missed so much. In cooking legumes, it is best not to add
the salt until they are nearly done, because the salt hardens the
water. If legumes are preferred cooked instead of baked, it is better
to add a thickening of flour and butter before serving, otherwise they
may produce flatulent dyspepsia.

Legumes lose their natural flavor and stimulus in the drying and
soaking process, therefore they are not palatable or easy to digest
without some form of fat and appetizing raw salad, which supplies
the needed stimulant. Many people add sweets to legumes or make them
more indigestible by adding ground nuts and other rich foods to them,
as in many vegetarian dishes. Such foods are a dangerous burden to a
weak stomach and liver. Heavy protein foods require an acid medium
for proper digestion and utilization. If legumes are used in the form
of soups and purees, nothing should be added but a little flour, dry
toast, fats, or raw vegetables. If we wish to be strict vegetarians
we must live upon raw foods. If we wish to live on cooked foods, a
moderate amount of meat is necessary for most people.


LIMA BEANS. No. 1.

Soak some lima beans in soft water. Cook in a small amount of water
with a little salt. When tender, dissolve some cornstarch with cold
water and add to the beans; boil for 10 minutes, then add a few
tablespoonsful of hot cream and remove from the fire. Flavor with
chopped parsley, if desired. Serve with frankfurter or other lean,
smoked meats. Mashed or raw carrots are also a good addition.


LIMA BEANS. No. 2.

Prepare like the foregoing. Drain off the water and add a piece of
butter, the yolk of an egg, a little lemon juice and parsley, if
desired.


LIMA BEANS. No. 3.

Prepare like the foregoing. Drain off the water and prepare a
butter-sauce, mix with beans and serve plain, or add the yolk of an
egg, a little lemon, and parsley.


PEA PUREE.

Soak ³⁄₄ cup of dried green peas in soft water. Boil with I quart of
water and 1 onion for about an hour. Bake in a bean-pot for 1¹⁄₂ hours
or longer; add more water if necessary. Keep the peas covered. When
done run through a colander and add 1 teaspoonful of butter. This makes
about ³⁄₄ of a cup of puree. One-third of this portion is sufficient
for a sick person or a young child. Serve on toast, or with raw
carrots, or cold fat meat.


BEAN AND LENTIL PUREE.

Prepare and serve like the foregoing. A small veal or mutton bone may
be boiled with it. The puree must not be greasy.


SOUR ROAST.

Let a quart or less of vinegar come to a boil, dilute it with one-half
the amount of boiling water, add some bay leaves, cloves, whole pepper,
onions, or any other flavoring, and pour over a piece of beef (rump
piece) which has been slightly rubbed with salt. Let it stand for
several days. Then take it out of the liquid, cover with bacon or suet,
and put into hot fat. After it has roasted for a while, stir a large
tablespoonful of flour into the fat, add some water, and the spiced
herbs. Cover well, and let it roast two or three hours. Add water or
buttermilk to the gravy, if desired. Serve with potato dumplings,
lettuce and stewed prunes.


VEAL CUTLETS.

Sprinkle some lemon juice over the chops, then beat up several yolks of
eggs, turn the chops in them, dip in rye nuts and fry in hot fat for
ten minutes. Serve with lettuce and tomatoes, or with boiled potatoes,
lettuce, stewed prunes or apple sauce.


CHICKEN IN GELATINE.

Put a small veal bone to boil with the chicken. When tender, take a
part of the broth, add some vinegar to it, boil for ten minutes with
onions and spiced herbs. Cut the chicken into pieces, place in a deep
bowl, and pour the hot broth and vinegar over it. Cool and serve the
next day. Use about ¹⁄₂ cup of vinegar to 1 quart of broth.

Another way is to pour pure, hot vinegar over the meat in the bowl, let
it stand an hour or longer, then pour off the vinegar, and pour enough
broth on the meat to cover it. Meat preserved in this way will keep on
ice or in a cool place for a week. The meat and gelatine may be brought
to a boil again at the end of the week. This will preserve it for a
longer time. Goose may be prepared in the same manner.


LAMB OR PORK IN GELATINE.

The loin is the best part for this purpose. Prepare with veal bone like
chicken.


PORK CUTLETS.

Prepare the same as veal cutlets. Fry with plenty of onions.


KIDNEY HASH.

Put the kidney into cold water for an hour, then scald with boiling
water and boil in the soup together with a soup bone. When done, mince
fine and prepare with a brown flour gravy. Serve on toast.


TRIPE.

Cut into small pieces and boil with a very little water, and a pinch of
salt. When done, add some sweet whey or tomato juice. Heat some butter
or oil, thicken with flour and add the liquid gradually, as for butter
sauce. Season with chopped parsley.


HAMBURG STEAK.

Grind some round steak in a meat grinder. Shape into flat cakes and fry
in hot fat with plenty of onions. Turn from side to side while frying.


STEAMED LIVER.

Liver must be fresh in order to be wholesome. During hot weather it
may become dangerous as a food after it is one day old. Remove the
toxic blood by placing the liver in water or sour milk for one hour.
Change the water several times. Then remove the skin and tie some bacon
or suet over it. Roll in flour and steam in fat for 20 minutes. Then
add sufficient boiling water to half cover the meat. Flavor with bay
leaves, salt, pepper and plenty of onions, also add a little vinegar
and sugar, and steam for about an hour. Keep the saucepan well covered.
Serve with potatoes or with apple and lettuce salad. The gravy can be
strained and used the next day for breakfast or supper. See recipe for
flavoring of sauces.


HASH.

Chop fine any kind of left-over, cold meat. Mix with one-third portion
of grated or mashed potatoes, and add plenty of finely chopped onion
and parsley. Brown some flour and butter, add a little soup stock and
mix with the meat. Cook and serve on toast or with salad of greens.


FRIED CALVES’ LIVER.

Slice the liver and put in cold water or sour milk for at least an
hour. Change the water several times, then dry the liver and fry on
a hot, oiled skillet, with onions. Serve with a salad of apples and
lettuce, with French or mayonnaise dressing.


TONGUE.

Soak the tongue over night in cold water. Boil from three to four hours
and serve with dried mushrooms and brown flour gravy.


CROQUETTES.

Chop fine some left-over meat, mix with one-half or one-third dried
bread-crumbs, a little salt, pepper and mace. Then add several beaten
eggs, mix well, form into balls, roll in egg and cracker-crumbs, and
fry in hot fat. Drain on paper or in a wire sieve.


TONGUE IN GELATINE.

Fresh left-over tongue may be kept for a while by preserving it in
gelatine with veal bone.


BRAINS.

Brains are very nutritious, but they are not a wholesome food for
people with chronic indigestion. They should be served on dry toast and
eaten with sour salads of fruits and greens.


SALISBURY STEAK.

Secure some fresh, thick, sliced, round steak. Scrape, or grind in a
meat-cutting machine, and mould into flat, round cakes. Have an iron
spider very hot and oiled to prevent sticking. Lay the meat cake in,
and turn from side to side till cooked sufficiently.


CREAMED CHIPPED BEEF.

Bring to a boil some soup stock from veal or mutton bone, thicken
with cornstarch or white flour, boil 10 minutes, and add one-quarter
or one-third part of hot cream. Cut or chop the dried beef fine, pour
over it some boiling water, let stand a minute, then drain, and mix the
beef with the cream gravy. Add a pinch of pepper, if desired. In place
of cream, milk and butter may be substituted and prepared like butter
sauce.


BREADED GOOSE.

Use goose which has been cooked in sour gelatine. Take the pieces out
of the bowl and warm in order to remove the gelatine. Then beat up
several yolks of eggs, turn the meat in it, then roll in flour or rye
nuts, and fry in hot fat. Serve with apple sauce or tomato puree.


HAM HASH.

Take equal parts of mashed potatoes and finely chopped boiled ham. Mix
with several well beaten eggs and fry in the form of a large flat cake.
Serve with macaroni.


MEAT CAKE.

Soak some stale bread in cold water. Press out very dry and mix fine.
Add some finely chopped onions, parsley, and a little pepper, and mix
with one-third or one-half of finely chopped left-over or fresh meat.
Mix all well and shape into a loaf. Bake in an oven with moderate heat.
Add boiling water and fat. Baste occasionally, and bake one hour. When
done, thicken the gravy with a little flour. Serve for dinner with
salad of greens.


SMALL MEAT CAKES.

Prepare the same as the foregoing. Shape into small balls and fry in
hot fat.


TURKEY.

Wash and clean the turkey, stuff it with tart apples, cut into
quarters, to which a half cup of dried currants and half cup of
bread-crumbs or rye nuts have been added. Sew it up, flavor and cover
with sliced salt-pork or bacon. Fill the pan one-third full of boiling
water, add onions, cover and roast from two to three hours. Add more
water, if necessary. Serve with cranberry sauce. Use the gravy left in
the pan the next day, with steamed potatoes or rice, for breakfast or
dinner.


TURKEY STEW.

Cut off the wings, neck, and legs, before roasting the turkey. Put to
boil with a small veal bone, add the giblets and stew until tender.
Prepare a butter sauce from the broth. Flavor with onion and parsley.


TURKEY IN GELATINE.

Prepare like turkey stew, and finish like chicken in gelatine.


RIBS OF PORK WITH APPLE FILLING.

Prepare the same as turkey, sew the ribs together and roast two to
three hours.


STUFFED TURKEY NECK.

Cut off the neck from a large turkey. Stuff it with a bread dressing to
which the giblets, fat and liver of the turkey have been added. Roast
it in the same pan with the turkey or prepare it for another meal.


LIGHT BREAD DRESSING FOR TURKEY OR CHICKEN.

Remove the crust from a small loaf of graham bread. Crumble up the soft
part and mix with chopped parsley, onion, garlic, thyme, marjoram,
sage, salt, one well beaten egg and one-half cup of finely chopped fat
of the bird, or suet. This is sufficient for an 8-pound turkey. This
dressing is especially good for people with delicate stomachs.


BOILED BACON.

Select firm, eastern bacon. Wash thoroughly with cold and warm water.
Let it come to a boil, throw away the water and pour on some fresh
water. Boil about an hour. Let it cool on a platter and use the next
day. Warm, fat meat is not wholesome for a delicate stomach.


FRIED BACON.

Parboil the bacon for one-half hour. Follow directions for boiled
bacon. Let it cool and slice for frying. If the bacon is preferred raw,
pour some boiling water over sliced bacon, let stand 5 minutes, pour
off the water and fry or broil in the oven.


LEAF LARD.

Chop some leaf lard very fine and let it stand in cold water for
several hours, or over night. Fry in an iron skillet, with apples and
onions, until crisp and brown. Strain the lard into a bowl and serve
the residue warm with stale black bread. Spread the lard on black bread.


BACON FAT.

Remove the fat from boiled or fried bacon and spread on stale black
bread. Combine with raw apples. This is good for breakfast.




                             CHAPTER III.

                        FISH, CHEESE AND EGGS.


Fish should be cleansed as soon as it is caught, or directly after
delivery from the market, and preserved with salt until ready for
cooking. If the fish is to be fried, the salt should be washed off, the
fish thoroughly dried and rolled in egg and rye nuts, or flour. If the
fish is to be boiled, the salt should also be washed off, and the water
for seasoning be flavored with spiced herbs. If more salt is necessary,
add it to the water.


BOILED FISH.

Prepare as directed in the foregoing.

Fish in gelatine can be prepared with veal bone as directed for
chicken. For gravies with boiled fish, see chapter on “Sauces.”


SHELL FISH.

Shell fish, as well as all other fish, should be eaten only when in
season. People with chronic constipation and torpid liver should avoid
shell fish because they are soft, and easily putrefy. Oysters and
clams are a very valuable food for the sick, and also for the pregnant
woman. They are rich in lime substances and nourish the glands of the
body. They should be served in combination with lemon and greens, or be
prepared with milk.


PICKLED HERRING.

Clean and wash the fish. Place in a colander and add salt. Let stand
for several hours. Then, wash the fish and dry; roll in flour and fry
in hot fat or oil. Serve warm with lemon, or lay in a stone jar. Add a
few bay leaves, whole peppers, and raw onions. Bring some vinegar to a
boil with an equal amount of water, pour over the fish and add the fat
in which the fish have been fried. If they are kept for several weeks,
an extra amount of fat should be added for covering, so as to exclude
the air.


FISH CAKES.

Any left-over fish may be made into a nutritious dish for the morning,
noon, or evening meal.

Take equal quantities of finely chopped fish and grated potato, beat up
several eggs with a little salt and pepper, add some thick cream, and
flavor with grated onions. Form into balls with a tablespoon and fry in
hot fat. Serve with rice, or with a salad of apples, or tomatoes and
lettuce.


CODFISH CAKES.

Take one-third of shredded or finely chopped codfish with two-thirds of
grated potatoes; prepare as in the foregoing recipe.


COTTAGE CHEESE.

Put some whole, or skim milk, into a pan and set in a cool room,
which has plenty of fresh air. Do not cover the pan. If the room is
exposed to dust, put a few long sticks over the pan and cover with
a cheese-cloth. When the milk begins to get thick, set the pan into
a larger pan with warm water, and keep it in a warm place or in the
oven until the curd separates; it must not become hard. Then put a
cheese-cloth on a colander and pour the milk into it. Let stand for
several hours, until the whey is thoroughly drained off. Then chop
fine some green peppers or onions, mix with the cheese, add a little
salt and pepper, and serve with apple or potato salad or spread on
sandwiches. A few teaspoonsful of sugar and caraway seed may be added
in place of the onion and pepper.


SOFT BOILED EGGS.

Put the eggs into cold water, place on the stove, and when the water
begins to boil, the eggs will be done.


BOILED EGGS. No. 2.

Pour boiling water over them and let stand on a hot stove for 10
minutes.


BOILED EGGS. No. 3.

Pour boiling water over the eggs and let them stand on a hot stove for
15 to 30 minutes.


SCALLOPED EGGS.

Prepare a plain white sauce, mustard or horse-radish sauce. Cut some
hard boiled eggs in halves, pour the sauce over them. Serve with
potatoes.


OMELET.

Mix a tablespoonful of flour with a half cup of warm milk or water, and
a little salt. Beat up two eggs, mix well with flour and water, then
pour into a hot pan in which some butter has been melted. Cover and
bake on the stove with moderate heat for eight or ten minutes. Turn if
desired. Serve with lettuce and fruit sauce.


SCRAMBLED EGGS.

Beat together one-half cup of soup stock, milk or water, and 3 eggs.
Add one-half tablespoonful of flour and mix well. A little chopped,
cold, salted meat may be added. Pour all into a hot pan with melted
butter, and stir until it is stiff.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                                SOUPS.


LEGUME SOUPS.

Soups prepared from legumes, fruits or cereals require an addition of
fat in the form of butter, oil, the yolk of an egg, cream, or fat meat.

A soup of peas, beans, corn or lentils may be prepared from left-over
food or fresh cooked legumes. To one cup of cooked legumes add three
to five cups of hot water or weak soup stock, boil or mix well, then
strain. Heat one or two tablespoonsful of butter or half butter and
half cooking oil, add to this one or two tablespoonsful of mixed
flour, let boil, then add the hot broth at short intervals, stirring
to prevent lumps. When all the broth is used, let the whole boil a few
minutes. Remove from the fire, flavor with lemon juice, pepper, bay
leaves, chopped fresh thyme, sage or parsley, and serve.

To these soups an addition of hot cream may be made before serving,
if desired. They form a perfect and an economical meal without the
addition of meat, eggs, fish or other protein foods. Celery, lettuce,
raw apples and crackers with butter are a good addition. They should be
well masticated, and the soup eaten with them very slowly.


BEAN SOUP.

Wash 1¹⁄₂ cup of black, white, red or mixed beans and soak in 1 quart
of warm soft water over night. The next day add about 5 pints of cold
or boiling water to the beans, let come to a boil; add two finely cut
onions and a potato, parsley or other flavoring. Then wash ¹⁄₂ pound
of bacon several times with hot and cold water and put on to boil in
sufficient water to cover it. Let boil 5 or 10 minutes, pour off the
water and put the bacon into the bean soup. Let all boil for about
an hour; when the meat is tender, take it out and put on a plate to
cool. Let the soup simmer slowly for 3 hours or longer; then strain.
Let stand a little while, remove the fat and mix it with 2 or 3
tablespoonsful of flour in a clean saucepan over the fire, add the
strained bean soup gradually, let all boil a few minutes and serve.
If the soup is desired thin, use only a part of the fat and a little
flour. A cupful of strained tomato juice and chopped parsley may be
added before serving. This should make five soup plates full. Serve
with fried bread or bread and butter and raw carrots.


CREAM OF BEAN SOUP.

Prepare like the foregoing. Leave out the meat, butter, flour, and
tomatoes; mix with one-fifth part or less of hot cream before serving.
Add plenty of chopped parsley.


PEA SOUP AND CREAM OF PEA SOUP.

Prepare like bean soup. Flavor with celery roots or stems.


TOMATO SOUP.

Strain a can of tomatoes and heat. Add an equal amount of boiling water
or soup stock. Heat some oil, butter or fat; add flour, boil a few
seconds; then add the tomato juice gradually and a little salt. Boil
all 3 to 5 minutes, then serve. It must be of the consistency of gravy.
Raw cucumbers and celery are a good addition.


CREAM OF TOMATO SOUP.

Prepare like the foregoing. Add ¹⁄₄ part or more of hot cream before
serving. If milk is used, it must be more in proportion than cream.


CREAM OF TOMATO SOUP. No. 2.

Mix 1 quart of hot water or veal stock with 1 quart of strained hot
tomato juice. Dissolve 2 to 3 tablespoons of cornstarch in cold water
and stir into the boiling fruit juice. Boil 10 minutes, and season with
salt and a little sugar, if desired. Remove from the fire, add hot
cream, mix and serve. Good in the summer.


HUCKLEBERRY SOUP.

Wash one quart of huckleberries and boil with two quarts of water and
a piece of cinnamon. When done strain or leave the berries in the
soup. Shape some dumplings with a dessert spoon and boil in the fruit
soup until they rise to the top. Use recipe for flour dumplings No. 1.
Cherry soup from fresh cherries may be prepared with dumplings instead
of thickening.


BLACKBERRY SOUP.

Prepare the same as the foregoing or see recipe for blackberry gruel.


CHERRY SOUP.

Remove the stones from one quart of cherries, and bring two quarts of
water to a boil with a stick of cinnamon, pour in the cherries and let
them simmer for 20 or 30 minutes. Add enough sugar to counteract the
tart taste and thicken with a little cornstarch. Cool and serve with
zwieback. If used for supper on hot days it should be prepared in the
morning, and allowed to cool. Beaten whites of eggs with a little sugar
may be placed on top. Serve on soup-plates.


DRIED CHERRY SOUP.

Soak some dried cherries for several hours. Cook with the desired
amount of water and a little sugar and cinnamon. Finish as the
foregoing. This is excellent for convalescents during the winter.


PLUM SOUP.

Wash one pound of blue plums and boil with three to four pints of
water, a stick of cinnamon and sugar until well done. Thicken with
cornstarch, or with sago which has been soaked. Cook 15 to 20 minutes
or longer. Run through a colander and add a piece of butter. Cool and
serve with zwieback and beaten whites of eggs, if desired. Hot cream
may be added in place of butter.


BEEF SOUP. No. 1.

Select a rump piece, wash thoroughly, put into boiling water, add
some salt, and skim. Chop fine some green onions, celery, asparagus,
parsley, carrots, turnips, add to the soup; young peas, bay leaves,
whole pepper and chopped bacon may be added. Cover tightly, and boil
slowly for two or three hours. Then brown several tablespoonsful of
flour in the same amount of butter, add to the soup, and boil ten
minutes longer. Strain and serve. A glass of Madeira or white wine may
be added.


BEEF SOUP. No. 2.

Prepare like number one. Instead of brown flour, add one-half cup of
barley which has been soaked and boiled in a small amount of water for
an hour. Then add to the soup, boil all together for an hour or longer,
strain and serve. A good addition to boiled beef is a salad of celery
root, or apples, or potato dumplings.


CLEAR SOUP, WITH RICE.

Select some fresh chicken, beef, lamb or several kinds of meat. Wash
thoroughly, and put into boiling water, add salt and skim. Flavor with
potatoes, onions, or any kind of greens which is most desirable. Boil
two or three hours and strain. Boil some rice with salt water in a
separate saucepan, bake in the oven until well done. Remove from the
fire, add a piece of butter, the yolk of an egg and some grated nutmeg.
Stir all well, pour into a dish, serve with the soup like mush and milk.

Clear broth beaten up with yolks of several eggs may be served in cups.


VEGETABLE SOUP, WITH MEAT.

Wash a piece of bacon or ham thoroughly, cover with cold water and
bring to a boil. Pour the water off and put on again in boiling water.
When the meat is half done add some bay leaves, carrots, celery, young
peas, asparagus, parsley, cauliflower, and dried prunes or pears and
cinnamon. When the vegetables are tender, brown some butter and flour,
mix with finely chopped marjoram and thyme; add to the soup, boil a few
minutes longer, and serve. This is excellent in the spring-time. For
people with digestive troubles, the soup must be strained. A few raw
yolks of eggs may be beaten up with the soup before serving, if desired.


SOUP STOCK.

Wash some beef, mutton or veal bone thoroughly. Put to boil in cold
water, skim and cook for four hours or longer. When done, strain into
several stone jars or bowls. Let cool and set on ice. When preparing
soup, cook the desired amount of vegetables in a little salt water;
when tender, add the soup stock, bring all to a boil and strain. This
stock can also be used for the preparation of vegetables and purees,
especially for people who do not eat meat. Add one-half to one whole
cup of stock to the vegetable water and prepare with a butter sauce.


KIDNEY SOUP WITH RICE.

Use soup stock or prepare a clear strong meat soup from middle rib or
soup bone to which one or two kidneys have been added. For flavoring
tie the tops of celery roots and green onions into a bunch and cook in
the soup. The celery and onions can be eaten as a vegetable if desired.
Serve with plain water rice as directed for clear soup.


PIGEON SOUP.

Take old pigeon for soup. Flavor with asparagus or young peas. Boil
some rice in a little water and salt separately; when half done, add it
to the (pigeon) soup and cook an hour longer. Raw yolks of eggs may be
added to the soup before serving.


POTATO SOUP. No. 1.

Boil potatoes with salt water and an onion; pour off water, mash
potatoes fine, and add the potato water. Bring to a boil some fresh
cream and milk in a separate saucepan, and add it to the potatoes.
Flavor with a little pepper, and chopped parsley.


POTATO SOUP. No. 2.

Boil the potatoes in plenty of water with salt and onions; drain off
water, mash potatoes, and return to the potato water. Then melt some
butter, thicken with flour, add the hot potato soup to it gradually,
and boil all a few minutes. Bring some fresh milk and cream to a boil,
add it to the soup, and flavor with chopped parsley and pepper.


CLAM CHOWDER.

Prepare like potato soup number two, and add clams and hot cream.


OATMEAL SOUP, WITH HAM.

Wash one-half a cup of steel cut oats with cold water. Bring to a boil
with two or three quarts of water; add salt, celery, parsley, onions,
and about six potatoes. Wash a piece of bacon or ham with plenty of fat
on it, parboil it in water for ten minutes, then put it into the soup;
boil all for about two hours. Mash and strain. Take off the grease,
mix with flour, add the strained soup to it gradually, let boil a few
minutes. It can be prepared without meat. This is an economical and
nutritious dish.


BARLEY SOUP.

Prepare the same as oat meal soup. Fat meat may be used in place of ham.


KNORR’S PEA SOUP.

Knorr’s pea soup can be bought in all first class grocery stores. Time
for preparation, twenty minutes. It may be improved by adding hot
cream or gelatine to it, or by thickening it with butter and flour.
Bean, lentil, green corn, tomato, and several other soup extracts of
Knorr’s can be prepared in the same manner and improved in many ways if
desired. They are very nutritious and save time and labor.


BEER SOUP. No. 1.

Wash and chop fine some dried currants and raisins, put them to boil
with one pint of white, stale bread, three pints or more of cold water,
a piece of cinnamon, a little salt, a few spoonsful of sugar and about
a pint bottle of imported root beer. Boil very slowly for one-half hour
or longer, run through a colander. Add some hot cream or a piece of
butter and two yolks of eggs.


BEER SOUP. No. 2.

Bring to a boil a pint of imported root beer and a pint of water.
Flavor with a piece of cinnamon. Mix two or three tablespoonsful of
white flour with cold water, and put into the boiling beer, add some
sugar and salt. Boil eight to ten minutes. Remove from the fire, add to
it a cupful of hot cream while stirring. Serve with zwieback.


BEER SOUP. No. 3.

Prepare like beer soup number one, in place of white bread use stale
black bread or one-half of each. This is excellent for constipation.


MILK SOUPS.

Milk soups may be prepared with rice, buckwheat, barley, tapioca,
oats, wheat, flour, corn, macaroni or rye. Oats and barley should
be soaked. Rich milk with one-half water is preferable to skim milk
or poor milk. Bring the desired amount of milk and water to a boil,
stir the grains into it, and boil one-half to one hour. Whole vanilla,
cinnamon, or lemon rind may be boiled with it. Salt should not be added
until done. It may be flavored with grated bitter almond, fine pepper,
mace or nutmeg, or extract of vanilla or other flavoring. Concentrated
flavorings should not be added until it is removed from the fire. Yolks
of eggs may be added before serving. (Oats, barley and buckwheat do not
mix well with eggs.) Sugar is not necessary for milk soups, but if it
is desired, it should be added while boiling.


BUTTERMILK SOUP.

Mix some white flour with cold buttermilk, stir over the fire until it
boils, add sugar and boil ten minutes. Add hot cream or yolks of eggs
or flavoring before serving, as desired.


MILK SOUP WITH MACARONI.

Break some macaroni into boiling salted water, boil fast for 45
minutes. When done, add an equal part of buttermilk or sweet milk.
Thicken with a little rice flour.


MILK SOUP WITH FLOUR DUMPLINGS.

Prepare some flour dumplings with or without eggs. Drop into boiling
salted water when done, add some hot milk or buttermilk. Thicken with a
little flour, add salt and serve. Sweet dried fruits can be added.


BUTTERMILK SOUP WITH RICE.

Cook some rice with water as directed for “Water Rice”; when done add
one quart of buttermilk to one quart of cooked rice, mix well and stir
over the fire until it boils. Add one-third cup of sugar and simmer
with a piece of cinnamon or vanilla for half an hour longer. Add more
salt if necessary. Some dried soaked cold prunes, currants or raisins
may be mixed with the soup before serving. This forms a perfect meal
for dinner on hot summer days or for supper in winter or summer.


ASPARAGUS SOUP. No. 1.

Cut off one-third of the upper end of the asparagus, then wash, cut in
pieces and put to boil in water, add some salt; when tender thicken
with mixed flour, let boil 10 minutes. Add one-third rich hot milk,
flavor with pepper. Serve.


ASPARAGUS SOUP. No. 2.

Prepare as No. 1; when tender, heat some butter, thicken with mixed
flour, add the asparagus water gradually and boil a few minutes. Then
remove from the fire, stir several yolks of eggs with a little cold
water on a soup plate, add the asparagus soup gradually. Flavor with
lemon and serve.


BARLEY SOUP. No. 1.

Soak a cup of pearl barley. Boil with two quarts of water, some celery,
onions, and finely cut carrots; cook for two hours or longer. Mash all
through a colander, add more boiling water if necessary. It must be
thick like gravy. Add a piece of butter or a little cream, and serve.


BARLEY SOUP. No. 2.

Prepare like the foregoing, add more hot water when straining. Melt
some butter or fat, add one or two tablespoonsful of mixed flour, and
part of the barley soup, and cook. When done, mix with the balance
of the barley soup. Let all boil up for a few minutes and serve. Add
plenty of chopped parsley.


BARLEY SOUP. No. 3.

Prepare like number one or two, boil without vegetables. Leave the
barley in it or strain. Mix with cold stewed prunes before serving. Add
cream, if desired.


CARROT SOUP.

Scrape and wash some young carrots. Cut into small pieces and stew
in water with a little salt. When done, mash up fine and run through
a colander. Prepare with butter, flour and soup stock. Add plenty of
chopped parsley, also raw pea juice, if desired.


SPINACH SOUP.

Prepare from spinach water, with butter and flour. When done, add a few
tablespoonsful of finely chopped spinach. Flavor with grated onion and
lemon.


MIXED VEGETABLE SOUP.

Chop up some celery, onion, potatoes, and parsley stems. Simmer in
water slowly for 30 minutes. Strain, and prepare with butter and flour.
Add plenty of chopped parsley. Finely cut cauliflower, string beans,
and peas can be prepared in the same manner. For people with delicate
stomachs the pulp of the vegetables should never be pressed through.


BREAD SOUP. No. 1.

Soak some stale white and black bread in boiling water for half an
hour. Put on to boil with more water. Cut up a few apples with the skin
and add a stick of cinnamon, a little sugar, salt, and some lemon rind.
Simmer for 30 minutes or longer. Press through a colander and add some
cold soaked raisins or currants and a piece of butter, also the yolk of
an egg, if desired.


BREAD SOUP. No. 2.

Prepare like the foregoing. Leave out the apples. Add hot cream or milk
in place of butter and egg. Use dried soaked currants or prunes, if
desired.


BREAD SOUP. No. 3.

Prepare as the foregoing. Add imported root beer, omit the apples, and
use more sugar. Strain and add hot cream or the yolk of an egg and
butter. Good for constipation.


BRAN SOUP. No. 1.

Use equal parts of stale bread and bran. Prepare like the foregoing.
Leave out the egg.


BRAN SOUP. No. 2.

Prepare like the foregoing. Use more water, and strain. Melt some
butter, thicken with mixed flour, add the hot broth gradually. When
done, remove from the fire and mix with soaked cold raisins and a few
drops of lemon.


BRAN SOUP. No. 3.

Use one cup of bran, four cups of water, four tablespoons of milk
sugar. Strain and thicken with butter and flour as directed for Bran
Soup No. 2. Omit the fruit. A little lemon may be used if desired. Good
for invalids.




                              CHAPTER V.

                    CEREALS, NOODLES AND DUMPLINGS.


BUCKWHEAT GROATS.

Wash one cup of buckwheat groats several times with cold water, add
about six cups of boiling water and two teaspoonsful of salt. Boil
rapidly for 20 minutes or until it thickens, then allow it to cook 50
or 60 minutes longer on the stove or in the oven. Serve with hot cream.
Cooked or stewed dried prunes may be eaten with it, or added to the
mush just before serving. Buckwheat is a winter food. People who suffer
from eruptions on the skin after eating buckwheat should let it alone.


STEEL CUT OATS.

Prepare the same as buckwheat groats. Rolled oats may be used instead.


ROLLED OATS WITH CRANBERRY SAUCE.

Boil two cups of rolled oats with a quart of water and a teaspoon of
salt for 20 minutes. Cover and set in the oven, or cook on the stove
for about 40 minutes. Remove from the fire, add a piece of butter
and a few drops of lemon juice. Serve on soup plates, pour over it
cranberry sauce, prune or apricot jam. Eat cold boiled bacon with it,
or raw celery or nuts at the end of the meal. It is good for dinner or
breakfast.


RYLAX WITH PRUNE JAM.

Prepare like the foregoing. Omit the lemon. Serve with prune jam and
fat meat, or with celery or nuts, or with hot cream.


ROLLED WHEAT.

Prepare and serve like rolled oats. Cranberries, prunes, apricots, or
apple sauce, are all good additions. The yolk of an egg may be added to
the wheat when mixing it with butter.


BRAN MUSH.

Bring one and one-half to two cups of water to a boil, add one-half
teaspoon salt. Drop in one shredded wheat biscuit and one-half cup of
bran. Mix all well and boil one minute. Serve with hot cream.


BRAN AND RYE MUSH.

Put one-half cup of rylax into boiling, salt water, and cook 20
minutes. When done, moisten one-half cup of bran with a little hot
water, and mix with the rye mush. Serve with hot cream.


RAW WHOLE WHEAT.

Soak one-half cup of whole wheat in three-quarters or one cup of warm
water over night. Keep the water warm, if possible. A small amount
of salt may be added. Serve with cream and dates, or with bananas,
carrots, or nuts.


BOILED WHOLE WHEAT.

Soak some whole wheat over night. Boil for several hours with
sufficient water and salt. Serve like the foregoing.


POLENTA (ITALIAN DISH).

Stir some yellow corn meal into boiling, salted water in an iron pot.
Boil for about 40 minutes and stir well to prevent burning. Eat with a
fork, and serve with cheese for breakfast or dinner.


RICE FLOUR. No. 1.

Mix a cup of rice flour with cold water, then add three or four cups of
boiling water while stirring. Boil 15 to 20 minutes. Before removing
from the fire, add some dried currants, which have been soaked for a
while. Put on a soup plate, and pour over it some hot cream.


RICE FLOUR. No. 2.

Use pure rice flour, or one-half cornstarch and one-half rice flour.
Prepare as number one. Before serving, mix with a piece of butter and
the yolk of one or several eggs, and flavor with vanilla, lemon or
bitter almonds. Put on a soup plate, and pour over it hot cream.


CORN MEAL MUSH.

Stir one and one-half cups of corn meal into four cups of boiling
salted water; cook 30 minutes; finish like foregoing. Use lemon for
flavoring.


BARLEY.

Soak a cup of pearl barley over night in soft water, and the next
day boil it in five or six cups of water for two hours or longer.
Flavor with onion, if desired, and if it does not become thick enough,
dissolve a little rice flour with cold water, and add it to the barley
ten minutes before removing from the fire. Serve with cream or with
fresh beef, or salted meat and lettuce for breakfast or dinner.


BREAD AND MILK.

Bring some fresh, whole or skimmed milk to a boil, pour on dried black
bread or crusts, and add a little salt. Let it stand for 10 minutes and
serve on soup plates.


CRACKER AND MILK.

Prepare like the foregoing, or pour one cupful of boiling salted water
over one large unleavened cracker, let stand 5 minutes. Then add one
cupful of hot milk and serve.


DIRECTIONS FOR BOILING RICE.

Wash one cup of rice, and pour into seven or eight cups of boiling,
salted water. Boil rapidly until the grains burst; then cover and put
into a hot oven or on a platter, and cook for 20 or 30 minutes. Remove
from the fire and add a piece of butter and the yolk of an egg, or
serve the rice with hot cream. Dried currants, raisins, apricots or
prunes may be mixed with the rice. If eaten in place of mush, pour the
rice on soup plates, and add hot cream.


MILK RICE.

Allow a pint of water and a pint of fresh milk to come to a boil with
vanilla or cinnamon, and put into it three or four tablespoonsful of
Japan or Carolina rice, which has been soaked for several hours. Boil
rapidly until the starch granules burst, then boil slowly for forty
minutes longer. If it is not thick enough, mix a little cornstarch in
cold water, and add to the rice when nearly done. The yolk of one or
more eggs may be added before serving, if desired. It may be eaten
plain in the form of a thick gruel or with a fruit sauce. It will serve
as a whole meal for children, morning, noon, or evening. A few nuts, or
some celery, may be eaten at the end of the meal.


RICE CREAM.

Cook one cup of rice like plain, water rice with a stick of cinnamon
or vanilla. When done, add the yolks of several eggs and a piece of
butter, or some hot cream and two tablespoonsful of sugar, or one-half
cup of soaked currants or raisins. Stir over the fire until it boils
again. Serve hot or cold with fruit sauce.


ALMOND RICE.

Cook rice with water as directed for boiling rice. When done, remove
from the fire, and mix with it some almond butter stirred smooth with
a little water. Some dried currants or apricots previously soaked may
be mixed with the rice. In combination with a dish of lettuce it will
serve as a whole meal. A few whole almonds may be eaten at the end of
this meal.


APPLE RICE.

Boil rapidly for 30 minutes one-half cupful of rice with three cupsful
of water and a little salt. Peel three medium sized apples, cut them
into small pieces after removing the cores, and add to the rice with
one tablespoonful of sugar. Cook on the stove or in the oven until the
apples are tender. Remove from the fire, add a piece of butter, and
serve with preserved or fresh meat, eggs, fish or cheese. A stick of
cinnamon may be boiled with the rice for flavoring.


APRICOT RICE.

Prepare as apple rice, and let the rice boil until tender. Then drain a
few preserved or canned apricots and add them to the rice, also a piece
of butter or one-half cup of hot cream. Mix well. Serve with lean meat,
eggs, or cheese.


CHERRY RICE.

Prepare like apple rice, and use ripe black cherries, or canned
cherries. Omit the juice. A tablespoonful of sugar may be added to
the fruit while boiling. It is necessary to have the rice boiled in
sufficient water, and long enough to allow each grain to burst before
the fruit is added, or the acid of the fruit will prevent the rice from
softening. Butter alone, or butter and the yolk of an egg, should be
added when acid or sub-acid fruits are mixed with cereals. Serve with
sterilized cream or with eggs, or eat nuts at the end of the meal.


CURRANT RICE.

Prepare like cherry rice. Add fresh ripe or dried currants in place of
cherries. Serve with sterilized cream or with fried or boiled eggs, or
with bacon.


RHUBARB RICE.

Prepare like the foregoing. Use sterilized rhubarb which has been
cooled. Serve with sterilized cream.


TOMATO RICE.

Prepare like apple rice. Use one-half to one cupful of strained, canned
tomato juice. Omit sugar. An onion may be boiled with the rice, if
desired. Serve with fried eggs or fish, and greens.


BROWN RICE.

Brown the rice in butter to a light yellow color. Add sufficient
boiling water and salt, and boil one-half hour or longer. Dried
mushrooms may be added, if desired. Serve with meat, fish, or eggs.


CARROT RICE.

Put some rice to boil in water with salt. Cut young French carrots into
small pieces and add; both will be done about the same time. Add finely
chopped parsley and a piece of butter. Serve with peas puree and fat
meat, or with fish.


MACARONI WITH CREAM.

Break up some macaroni and put in a saucepan, adding boiling water and
a little salt. Boil for 30 minutes, and add more water if necessary.
Dissolve some rice flour in a little cold water and thicken the
macaroni, then cover and bake in an oven for 30 minutes or longer. Heat
some rich cream in another saucepan and mix with the macaroni, and
serve. Flavor with a little pepper, or finely chopped, salted, lean
meat or parsley.


MACARONI WITH STOCK.

Prepare as the foregoing, boil 30 minutes, then add some stock and a
little strained tomato juice. Cover and put in the oven again for 30
minutes. Serve with grated cold cheese.


NOODLES.

Beat two eggs with two large tablespoonsful of water and a little salt.
Mix with sufficient white flour to make a stiff paste. Put some flour
on a wooden board, knead the dough and add more flour until hard and
dry; then roll out as thin as possible, dry in the sun or on a table,
and cut into fine strips. Boil in salted water for half an hour. Serve
with boiled beef or preserved salt meat, or with grated Swiss cheese
and lettuce.


DUMPLINGS.


LIGHT FLOUR DUMPLINGS.

Cream a tablespoonful of butter, and add to it a whole egg and the yolk
of one egg, some salt, nutmeg, chopped parsley, and two tablespoonsful
of flour. Stir well for several minutes. Form small dumplings with a
spoon, put into hot soup and boil eight minutes.


POTATO DUMPLINGS. No. 1.

Cream a tablespoonful of butter, add to it three yolks of eggs, a cup
of cold grated potato, and one cup of dry bread crumbs. Flavor with
lemon, rind, salt and nutmeg, and mix the beaten whites of two eggs
with it. Roll out into small dumplings, and boil eight minutes in soup
or water.


POTATO DUMPLINGS. No. 2.

Mix two cups of cold grated potato with two-thirds of a cup of flour
and one-half cup of creamed butter, adding the yolks of four eggs,
the whites of two eggs, and salt and flavoring. Mix well and form
dumplings. Boil in hot water for about 15 minutes. Serve with roasts.


BREAD DUMPLINGS. No. 1.

Put some stale white bread or rolls to soak in cold water and press out
as dry as possible. Add a tablespoonful of creamed butter, the yolks of
two or three eggs, salt and nutmeg. Add the beaten whites of two eggs.
Form dumplings with a spoon and boil in water, soup or fruit juice
until they swim on top. Serve with stewed prunes or apricots.


BREAD DUMPLINGS. No. 2.

Remove the crust from one-third of a loaf of milk bread and soak the
soft part in cold water for 5 minutes. Put it into a clean cloth and
force out the water. Cream three tablespoonsful of butter, or melt some
soup fat, mix with the bread and stir it very smooth. Let it cool, and
add the yolks of four eggs, salt, a little mace, some finely chopped
parsley, and onion, if desired. Then beat the whites of two eggs, mix
with the mass and form dumplings with a dessert spoon. Put them into
the boiling soup and cook for about 5 minutes or until they swim on top.


BAKED CORN MEAL DUMPLINGS.

Boil in two cups of milk or water two cups of white corn meal with a
tablespoonful of butter, stirring all the time, until the mass is very
thick. Let cool. Flavor with lemon rind and nutmeg, and mix with three
or four well beaten eggs. Shape into dumplings with a spoon, turn in
rye nuts or bread crumbs, and bake in butter. Serve with sugar and
cinnamon, or with apricot, apple or wine sauce.


MIXED DUMPLINGS.

Mix over the fire one and one-half cupsful of flour with two cupsful of
milk and a large tablespoonful of butter, until it does not stick to
the saucepan. Let it cool, add the yolks of four eggs, salt, cinnamon,
a tablespoonful of sugar, one-half cupful of finely cut fried bread
crust and bacon, then the beaten whites of eggs. Form medium sized
dumplings with a tablespoon, and boil in salted water for 5 or 6
minutes. Serve with stewed pears, cranberries or prunes. They are also
good with sauerkraut.


FLOUR DUMPLINGS. No. 1.

Mix one cupful of flour with one-half cupful of melted butter, one
cupful of hot water, and some salt. Stir well on a hot stove until no
more lumps appear. Cool a little, then mix with several yolks of eggs,
and flavor with mace, chopped parsley or other spices. Dip a spoon in
hot water and form dumplings of the desired size. Put into boiling salt
water or on top of stewed fruit, and boil 6 or 10 minutes, or until
they rise. The spoon must be dipped into hot water each time before
forming a dumpling. Serve with peas or stewed fruit.


FLOUR DUMPLINGS. No. 2.

Mix one cup of white corn meal and one cup of flour with a little cold
water, and stir it into boiling milk. Let it soak for 5 minutes or
until it is thick. Then add a piece of butter, salt, and flavoring; let
cool, mix with several yolks of eggs, and shape dumplings with a spoon,
and put into boiling soup or blackberry juice. Boil about 10 minutes,
or until they swim on top.


FLOUR DUMPLINGS. No. 3.

Mix some white flour, or three-fourths white and one-fourth rice flour,
with baking powder and salt. Shorten with butter and fat like dough for
pie. Roll out, enclose some apples and bake in the oven for 20 minutes
or longer.


FLOUR DUMPLINGS. No. 4.

Mix some flour with baking powder and salt. Stir to a light paste with
cold water, adding several eggs or yolks of eggs. Boil with meat stew
or in water.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                      BREADS, CAKES AND PUDDINGS.


POMPERNICKLE OR BLACK BREAD.

Prepare a sponge with a pint of white flour, three-fourths of a yeast
cake, a little salt and sugar, and a pint of warm water. When light,
add two quarts of rye meal, a tablespoonful of salt and about one quart
of water. Mix well, and let rise over night. The next morning add about
one quart of warm rye meal, and one of white flour; knead the dough for
at least one-half hour. Let rise again, knead a little more, and shape
into loaves. When light, bake in a hot oven, for about an hour. Pure
rye meal may be used in place of one-fourth white flour.


WHOLE WHEAT BREAD.

Prepare the same as black bread. Use whole wheat flour in place of rye
meal.


LIGHT WHOLE WHEAT BREAD.

Make a sponge from one cupful of luke warm water and one cake of yeast,
with enough white flour to make the thickness of sponge cake. Cover and
set in a warm place, about 90 degrees F. When foamy, add about three
pints of luke warm water, or milk which has been scalded and cooled to
luke warm, about two teaspoonsful of salt, a little sugar and a piece
of butter or fat. Stir into it with a spoon sufficient white flour to
make it of the same consistency as the first sponge. Beat it from 10 to
15 minutes, dust the top with flour, and put it into a warm place to
rise. When light, add enough whole wheat flour to make a stiff dough.
Put it on bread-board with flour to prevent sticking, knead for half
an hour or longer, and let it rise again. When light, shape in loaves
without kneading, put into pans and prick top with a fork several
times. When sufficiently raised, bake in hot oven for about an hour.
Cover top with pieces of oiled paper, the first 20 or 30 minutes. When
done, put the bread on a sieve or in towels to cool.


LIGHT GRAHAM BREAD.

Prepare in the same manner as light whole wheat bread.


WHITE BREAD.

Prepare the same as whole wheat bread, using pure, rich milk, cream
and water, or sweet whey. Add a large piece of butter or cocoanut. Use
white flour instead of whole wheat, mix it with one-fourth white corn
meal, or rice flour.


COFFEE CAKE.

Prepare the same as white bread, using less flour, and add a few well
beaten eggs, the grated rind of several lemons and oranges, or flavor
with nutmeg, dried fruit, vanilla, mace or bitter almonds. Serve with
fresh, sweet milk, or with scalded milk, as a whole meal for supper.

All breads and cakes made with yeast are more nutritious and wholesome
when stale, on account of the evaporation of water and the changes
which take place in the bread. They should be kept in tins with holes
on all sides, to allow a perfect circulation of air. The tins should
be placed in the sunlight, or on a high, dry place near a stove. In
many foreign countries pompernickle is kept for many months during the
winter by placing it on top of high stone ovens near the ceiling. It
finally assumes a sweet taste similar to that of nuts.

Bread and cake may be kept sweet and free from mildew for a long time
in the following way: Cut it with a sharp knife, when about four days
old, into slices about one inch thick, then place it on a large, wire
screen in the hot sunshine, cover with a cheese cloth, and let it
lie for several hours, turning each slice until thoroughly dry. Then
place the slices in an upright position in a square box made of wire
screening, and keep in a dry or sunny place, covered with a light
cloth. The box may be placed in the sunshine several times a week.


ROMAN MEAL BREAD.

Prepare the same as whole wheat bread, and use Roman meal instead of
whole wheat flour.


BISCUITS.

Mix one quart of white flour with one-fourth of entire wheat
flour, corn meal, or rice flour. Mix it thoroughly with two level
teaspoonsful of salt, and four of baking powder. Rub into it two
tablespoonsful of vegetable fat or butter. Mix with rich milk and
prepare as usual. Serve with salted, preserved meat and eggs, or with
rich cheese and olives and salad of greens.


POP-OVERS.

Grease the iron gem pans, and place on the stove or in the oven, to
have them very hot. Then beat two eggs very light, mix a cup of rich
milk with a cup of flour, and a half teaspoonful of salt; add the eggs
and beat with an egg beater until all is very light. Pour the mixture
into the pans, filling two-thirds full, and bake in a quick oven. This
will make about eight pop-overs.


BRAN MUFFINS.

Mix one cupful of white flour with one-half cup of graham flour
and one and one-half cups of finely sifted bran. Rub into it three
tablespoonsful of butter; then add one and one-half cups of sour milk,
a teaspoonful of soda, a little salt and three tablespoonsful of
molasses. Put into hot muffin tins, and bake in a hot oven.


BRAN BREAD.

Beat the whites of three eggs to a stiff snow, add a little salt, and
mix with two tablespoonsful of fine, sifted bran, and two of fine rye
nuts. Put the mixture on a pie tin and bake in a very moderate oven.
Leave the door open. Serve with apple salad and lettuce.


BOSTON BROWN BREAD.

Mix together one cup of coarse corn meal, one of rye flour, one of
graham flour, and a teaspoonful of salt. Dissolve two teaspoonsful
of soda in two cupsful of sour milk and mix with the flour, adding
three-fourths cup of molasses. Pour into narrow, oiled tins, and steam
for four hours. Serve with lettuce, celery and apple, or tomato salad,
and nut butter.


WHITE MUFFINS.

Use mixed flour, or rice and wheat as suggested for white bread. Mix
with baking powder and salt. Use two eggs and about one and one-half
cups of rich milk to about three cups of flour. Serve with tomato or
peas puree and lettuce for breakfast or supper.


PASTRY FOR TARTS OR PIES.

Mix one and a half cups of white flour with one-half cup of rice
flour. Add one-half teaspoonful of salt, shorten the flour with three
tablespoonsful of butter and three of oil. Then add to it the yolks of
two eggs beaten with sufficient ice cold water and a little rum to make
a paste which is not very stiff. Roll it several times, then cover and
put it in the ice box for an hour.


SAND TART.

Mix one-half pound of white flour and one-half pound of rice powder, or
wheat starch. Keep in a warm place. Melt one pound of butter, cool and
cream with one pound of sugar, adding ten yolks of eggs, alternating
with the flour. Stir the mass for one-half hour, add the rind of two
lemons, the juice of one-half lemon, and two tablespoonsful of rum.
Beat the whites of ten eggs, mix lightly with the dough, and add a
teaspoonful of baking powder. Bake in a moderate oven for one and
one-half to two hours. During the first half hour have more heat at the
bottom than at the top. During the last half hour have little or no
heat at the bottom. The cake tin should not be moved.

The tart may be baked in layers or on round tins and be mixed with
different colors, if desired.


PLAIN CAKE.

Cream one-half cup of butter with one-half cup of sugar, add two eggs,
two cups of flour, two teaspoonsful of baking powder, a little salt,
one cup of water, one-half cup of raisins or currants, and any kind
of flavoring. Bake in cake tins. Cake prepared with water is more
wholesome than with milk.


FROSTING.

Cream equal quantities of butter and chocolate. Spread on the layers
when cold. Frosting prepared from pure sugar is unwholesome.


STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE.

Prepare a light biscuit dough, bake in tins and cover with strawberries
and whipped cream. Use no more sugar than is necessary.


FRUIT CAKE.

Chop up one cup of currants, citron, and raisins, and mix with one
cup of flour. Sift one cup of flour with a teaspoonful of soda, one
of cinnamon, and a little salt. Cream one-half cup of butter with one
cup of brown sugar, one-half cup of molasses and two well beaten eggs;
add the flour, fruit and one-half to three-fourths cup of strong black
coffee. Stir well and bake in a moderate oven for one hour.


MIXED FLOUR.

Mix two cups of white flour with one cup of rice flour and one of
cornstarch. Sift and keep in a tin box for sauces and soups.


RYE NUTS. No. 1.

Remove the outer crust from a loaf of stale pompernickel and grate the
soft part on a grater. Pour the crumbs on a large piece of paper, and
dry in the sun or in an oven. Keep in a dry place, in a tin with good
ventilation.


RYE NUTS. No. 2.

Cut a loaf of stale pompernickel into thin slices and remove the
crusts. Cut the inside into small strips, lengthwise and crosswise.
Allow it to dry thoroughly in a moderate oven or in the sun, and while
still warm, grind it through a coarse meat grinder. Place it again in
an oven or in the sun to dry, or brown slightly. If desired as fine
as grape nuts, grind it again or sift it, and keep in a dry place. It
may be mixed with one-half grape nuts. Use as directed in menus and
recipes. The outside crusts may be dried in the oven or sun, and kept
in tins. The crusts are an excellent addition to milk soups or other
soft foods.


SUN DRIED BREAD.

Cut stale pompernickel, whole wheat or white bread into slices, then
cut in strips crosswise and lengthwise to the size of lump sugar.
Allow it to dry in a moderate oven or in the sun. Keep in a dry place
in sacks or tins. Use with milk as directed in recipes. It may be dried
in slices and eaten in place of fresh bread.


FRIED BREAD.

Cut into strips as directed in the foregoing recipe. Fry in hot oil, or
butter and oil. Serve with legume or fruit soups.


CRUSTS.

Cut some stale whole wheat or black bread into slices. Remove the outer
crusts with a sharp knife and dry them in an oven. Keep in a tin box in
a dry place.


IMPERIAL STICKS.

Cut stale buttered bread into long narrow sticks, and brown in the oven.


CORN BREAD. No. 1.

Three-fourths of a cup of white or yellow corn meal, one and one-fourth
cups of white flour, one teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonsful of
butter or one-half oil and one-half butter, two teaspoonsful of baking
powder, two well beaten eggs, one and one-half cups of rich milk, and
sugar, if desired. Bake in a quick oven for 30 minutes.


CORN BREAD. No. 2.

Bring one quart of water to a boil, and add a teaspoonful of salt. Stir
about one cup of coarse yellow corn meal into it and let boil 30 or
40 minutes. Then take it off the fire, beat thoroughly with a spoon,
and cool until lukewarm. Add a large tablespoonful of oil or butter,
a little lemon juice and four yolks of eggs. Stir well, and add the
beaten whites of the eggs. Put the mixture into a flat, oiled pan and
bake or heat on a griddle. Small cakes may be formed from the batter
and baked in an oven or fried until browned nicely. The whites of eggs
may be left out, if desired. Serve with salads of lettuce, watercress,
tomatoes or apples, or with fruit sauces. Acid and super-acid fruits
combine best with this bread.


CORN BREAD. No. 3.

Prepare the same as number two, using white corn meal. Flavor with
cinnamon, vanilla or bitter almond, and mix with dried, soaked fruits
as currants, finely cut apricots, or prunes, or serve with a fruit
sauce prepared from blackberries, huckleberries or the above mentioned
fruits.


DOUGHNUTS.

Use four eggs, a small cup of sugar, two cups of rich fresh milk,
a teaspoonful of salt, and about one quart of flour finely sifted
with two teaspoonsful of baking powder. Add grated lemon rind or
cinnamon, for flavoring. Beat the dough until very light. Drop by the
tablespoonful into hot fat. Stewed cold prunes or apricots may be
placed in the middle of each doughnut. They may be served with fruit
soups, fruit sauces, or green salads for dinner in the summer, or for
supper in the winter.


CEREAL OMELET.

To two cupsful of left-over boiled wheat add two well beaten eggs, half
a teaspoonful of salt, finely chopped parsley and onion. Heat butter
and oil in a frying pan, and pour into the mixture. Cook by moderate
heat until firm. Serve with crisp bacon, if desired.


HOMINY CAKES.

Prepare the same as Cereal Omelet or mix with eggs only, and serve with
fruit sauce.


BREAD OMELET.

Remove the crust of one-half loaf of stale milk bread. Soak the bread
in cold milk or water for 5 minutes. Lay it in a cloth and press out
as dry as possible. Cream one-half cup of butter with one-half cup of
sugar; add one-half cup of dried currants, one-half cup of almond meal,
the rind of one or two lemons or oranges, four yolks of eggs, some
cinnamon or mace and a little salt. Mix well, and add the beaten whites
of four eggs. Heat a large flat pan, oil it well, sprinkle with rye
nuts and pour in the batter. Bake on a medium hot stove, turning the
omelet, or bake in the oven. Serve with fruit sauce and green salad.


SNOW BALLS.

Place four eggs in warm water. Mix two cups of flour with a cup of warm
water, salt, and one-half cup of melted butter. Stir it over the fire
until the flour does not stick to the saucepan. Let cool and mix with
the eggs. Beat the dough for about ten minutes. Shape balls with two
tablespoons, and bake in the oven or fry in hot, deep fat. Sprinkle
with sugar and serve for afternoon tea or for supper.


EGG TOAST.

Soak slices of stale bread in milk, and beat up some eggs with a little
salt and cinnamon. Turn the soaked bread into the egg, and fry in hot
butter. The milk and eggs may be beaten up together and the bread
soaked in it before frying. Serve with apple, cranberry or apricot
sauce, or with syrup and lettuce. This is suitable morning, noon or
night.


RICE FRITTERS.

Mix some left-over rice with several well beaten eggs, and the grated
rind of a lemon. Bake on a hot griddle. Serve with fruit sauce and
lettuce, morning, noon or night.


UNLEAVENED GERMAN PANCAKES. No. 1.

Use six eggs, six tablespoonsful of flour, one and one-half cup of warm
milk, one-half cup of cream, and a little salt. Mix well the yolks,
salt, cream, milk and flour, then add the whites of the eggs beaten
stiff. The dough must be of the consistency of thick cream. Bake in
thin layers in half butter and half oil, in a small pan. Serve with
lettuce and fruit sauce or with French dressing at the noon meal.


GERMAN POTATO PANCAKES. No. 2.

Grate five large raw potatoes and one onion. Mix two tablespoonsful of
white flour with a little warm water and a cup of rich cream, add salt
and mix with the potatoes. Then add three whole eggs beaten well, and
fry in hot fat like griddle cakes, until brown. Serve with apple sauce,
or lettuce and French dressing.


GERMAN PANCAKES. No. 3.

Mix one pint of white flour and one-fifth pint of rice flour with
one pint of rich warm milk, or with one-half milk and one-half warm
water, and a teaspoonful of salt. Beat four whole eggs, add to the
mixture and beat with an egg beater for a few minutes, until perfectly
smooth. Bake on a small, shallow, iron, griddle, using about four
tablespoonsful of the mixture for each cake. The fat used for frying
must be boiling hot. Pile on a plate standing over hot steam until all
are done. Cut in sections and sprinkle with sugar, if desired. Serve
with green salads or apples, or with apple, apricot or cranberry sauce.


PLUM PANCAKES.

Prepare the batter a little thicker than the foregoing. Peel and slice
some blue plums very thin, mix with the batter and bake as above.


GERMAN PANCAKES WITH BACON.

Cut some bacon into narrow short strips. Fry until crisp, place in a
bowl and mix with a piece of butter or with oil. Keep it in a warm
place while baking the pancakes. Pour some fat and six pieces of bacon
into the pan for each cake, and bake the same as German pancakes. Do
not allow a metallic spoon to remain in hot fat.


APPLE PANCAKES.

Peel some apples and cut in thin slices. Mix with the dough as directed
for German pancakes and fry on both sides. If fewer eggs are used, take
a little more flour.


CHERRY PANCAKES.

Remove the stones from ripe black cherries. Prepare the dough as
directed for German pancakes, mix the cherries with it and fry in hot
fat.


BUCKWHEAT CAKES.

Mix prepared or unleavened buckwheat flour with sweet cream or one-half
cream and one-half water, and bake on a hot griddle. Serve with fruit
sauce or French dressing at the morning or noon meal.


ROMAN MEAL CAKES.

Soak two tablespoonsful of dried currants in a little hot or cold
water. Mix one-half cup of flour with one teaspoonful of baking powder,
a little salt, and one cup of Roman meal. Beat two eggs very light,
with about one-half cup of water, mix with the flour and currants and
bake in hot fat. Serve fruit sauce with them.


MATZOON PUDDING.

Soak matzoon in cold water or milk for several minutes. Then press out
dry, stir until fine and mix with several well beaten eggs, cream, or
butter, and raisins, chopped apples, currants, lemon rind or any other
flavoring. Heat a cupful of oil or suet in a high iron pot, put the
pudding mixture into it and bake in a moderately hot oven for about one
hour. Serve warm with fruit sauce or wine sauce.


MATZOON CAKES.

Prepare the same as the foregoing. Shape into small balls with two
tablespoons and fry in hot fat.


FISH PUDDING.

Cream three-fourths of a cup of butter, add to it four eggs, nutmeg,
salt, parsley, two cups of bread crumbs, four cups of finely chopped
left-over codfish or salmon, and some lemon juice. Mix well and steam
one and one-quarter or one and one-half hours. Serve with a butter
sauce prepared with soup stock.


MEAT PUDDING.

Prepare like fish pudding. Use four cups of finely ground meat in place
of fish.


LIVER PUDDING.

Prepare like fish pudding. Use three and one-half cups of grated or
ground left-over liver and one-half cup of finely chopped cold, fat
meat or suet. Serve with caper or tomato sauce.


POTATO PUDDING.

Cream one-half cup of butter with one-half cup of sugar, add the yolks
of six eggs, two cups of grated potatoes, salt, cinnamon and the rind
of one lemon; then add one cup of black or white bread crumbs and the
beaten whites of six eggs. A half cup of almond meal mixed with a few
bitter almonds may be added to the mixture, if desired. Bake this
pudding for about sixty or seventy minutes, or boil two hours. Serve
with stewed prunes or apple sauce.


PLAIN BREAD PUDDING.

Soak some stale bread in cold water, press it out thoroughly and stir
smooth over the fire, with some butter or fat. When cool, add salt and
several well beaten eggs or some flour, syrup and chopped suet, mix
well and add any desired flavoring or sugar. Tie in a cloth and boil
for two hours in salt water, or with white beans. Serve with stewed
fruit.


RICE PUDDING.

Cook some rice as directed for water or milk rice. When cool, cream
some butter with an equal amount of sugar, and add several well beaten
eggs, lemon rind, cinnamon, a little bread crumbs, some raisins or
currants and some sweet or sour cream, or melted butter. Bake for about
an hour.


SAGO PUDDING.

Soak the sago and cook with one-half water and one-half milk. Finish
like rice pudding.


FLOUR BREAD PUDDING.

Mix over the fire two cups of flour with two cups of milk or water, and
three-fourths of a cup of melted butter, until the batter loosens from
the bottom of the saucepan. Let it cool a little and add the yolks of
four eggs, two tablespoonsful of sugar, two cups of bread crumbs, salt
and mace. Then beat the whites of four eggs, mix and add one-half glass
of cognac. Pour the mixture into an oiled pudding pan and steam two and
one-half hours. Serve with stewed plums, pears, or cherries.


CORN MEAL PUDDING.

Bring two cups of milk to a boil, and mix four cups of yellow or white
corn meal with a pint of cold water. Stir into the boiling milk and add
two tablespoonsful of butter. When it is thick, remove from the fire
and cool. Cream half a cup of butter with three-fourths cup of sugar,
add the yolks of four or five eggs, salt, lemon rind, several grated
bitter almonds, and the beaten whites of the eggs. Put into a pudding
pan and steam from two to two and one-half hours. In place of bitter
almonds use lemon juice, if desired. Serve with white or red wine
sauce, or with stewed apricots or cranberries.


RICE FLOUR PUDDING.

Prepare the same as corn meal pudding.


APPLE-BREAD PUDDING.

Grease a pudding dish and fill with alternate layers of mixed bread
crumbs and apple sauce. Begin with bread crumbs, using whole wheat or
rye nuts. Mix the apple sauce with a large piece of butter, while still
warm. When the dish is filled, beat up two eggs with a tablespoonful of
sugar, one-half cup of cream, a little salt and some cinnamon; pour it
over the top and bake in moderate hot oven for forty or fifty minutes.
It affords a perfect meal for the evening. If served at noon, eat some
nuts at the end of the meal.


BAKED BREAD PUDDING.

Pour two pints of hot milk over two cups of bread crumbs, cool a
little, then cream one-half cup of butter with one-half cup of sugar,
mix with the bread crumbs, adding three well beaten eggs, a teaspoonful
of salt, a little nutmeg or cinnamon, the juice of one-half a lemon and
the rind of two lemons. Mix well together, and bake in a buttered dish
for fifty or sixty minutes. Serve with wine sauce, lemon, cherry or any
kind of fruit sauce. Dried fruits may be mixed with the batter. Serve
for supper, using broth, meat soup, or cream soup at the beginning of
the meal. Celery is an excellent addition to almost any food at the
evening meal.


VEGETABLE PUDDING. No. 1.

Prepare as baked bread pudding. Use legume soup in place of milk,
leaving out the sugar. Use butter or cream and mix with two
tablespoonsful of peanut butter or other nut butter or walnut meats.
The eggs can be omitted. Flavor with finely chopped onions, celery and
parsley. Pour on oiled pie tins and bake thirty to forty minutes. Serve
with tomato sauce or string beans for dinner.


VEGETABLE PUDDING. No. 2.

Boil some rice with salt and water. Add a cupful of thick legume puree
and finish like the foregoing.


STEAMED BREAD PUDDING.

Soak some stale bread in cold water, press out dry, and stir smooth.
Melt one-third of a cup of fat and one-half of a cup of butter, and
mix the bread with it on a hot stove, stirring until it loosens from
the saucepan. Cool a little, and flavor with mace, nutmeg, lemon rind
or cinnamon and salt. Add several well beaten eggs and some finely cut
dried fruit. Mix well and steam from one to one and one-half hours.
Serve with lettuce and fruit sauce. In place of fruit and the above
flavoring, chopped parsley, onions and pepper, bacon, anchovy, capers
or codfish may be used. Serve with tomato or apple sauce.


SUET PUDDING.

Mix four and one-half cups of flour with three cups of milk,
one-half pound of finely chopped suet, four well beaten eggs, four
tablespoonsful of sugar, a teaspoonful of salt and the rinds of two
lemons. Grease a pudding pan, sprinkle some black or white bread crumbs
into it, pour in the batter and steam for two hours. Serve with stewed
fruit, cherries, pears, or plums, or with wine sauce, for dinner.


UNCLE TOM’S PUDDING.

Mix one-half a pound of flour with one-half a pound of syrup. Then chop
fine one-fourth of a pound of suet, and mix with a little flour. Beat
one-half a pint of milk with two eggs, and add a half cup of sugar,
salt, mace, cinnamon, cloves and one tablespoonful of soda. Mix well
and pour into a pudding dish, and steam for two hours. Serve with wine
sauce No. 1 or with fruit sauce.


BLACK BREAD PUDDING.

Cream one cup of butter with three-fourths of a cup of sugar, and add
the yolks of five eggs, three-fourths of a cup of dried currants or
raisins, the rind of a lemon, a little cinnamon and cloves, salt, three
cups of grated black bread and one-half a glass of wine or brandy. Mix
well and add the beaten whites of the five eggs. Oil a pudding pan and
pour the mixture into it. Steam two and one-half hours, and serve with
vanilla, or white wine sauce. A cupful of rich cream, diluted almond
butter or one-half cup of almond meal may be mixed with the batter, if
desired.


PLUM PUDDING. No. 1.

Moisten two cups of bread crumbs with a little cream, and add two cups
of finely chopped suet, two of currants, two of raisins, one of sugar,
one-half cup of almond meal, one-half cup of finely chopped orange and
lemon rind, a little nutmeg, salt, one-half glass of brandy and two or
three well beaten eggs. Mix all well and steam in a cloth or pudding
pan for five hours.


PLUM PUDDING. No. 2.

Use two cups of flour, one-half cup of bread crumbs, one cup of rich
milk, and a little fruit. Mix and boil like No. 1. The almond meal may
be left out.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                      SAUCES AND SALAD DRESSINGS.


SAUCES.

Sauces are a necessary addition to cooked foods, especially in cold
weather. The proper utensils used for sauce making are wooden spoons
and flat, round bottomed saucepans.

Good fresh butter, oil and dry flour are necessary to make nutritious
sauces. Flour for thickening should boil at least ten minutes. If
the flour is to be cooked with fat before the liquid is added, only
a few minutes of boiling is necessary, for the reason that fat, when
boiled, reaches a higher temperature than water or milk. Mixed flour
is preferable to pure wheat flour. Sauces prepared from soup stock,
vegetables or fruits and gelatines are a better addition to meats than
brown gravies, which are prepared from the small amount of juice which
is extracted from the meat by roasting. Sauces prepared in the latter
way are too rich as a food if eaten in combination with meat; they are
a perfect meal by themselves if eaten in combination with whole wheat
bread and greens.


BUTTER SAUCE. No. 1.

Melt three tablespoonsful of butter, or half butter and half oil, mix
with two tablespoonsful of flour over the fire, and boil for a few
seconds. Then add gradually a pint of boiling water or soup stock or
hot whey, while stirring it. Boil a few minutes. Flavor with salt,
onion, chopped parsley, celery, nutmeg, bay leaves, anchovy-paste,
lemon, chopped salted meat or whatever flavor is desired. Serve with
meat or fish.


BUTTER SAUCE. No. 2.

Prepare like the foregoing. Use milk in place of water, or soup stock.


TOMATO SAUCE.

Prepare as number one, using strained tomato juice instead of water.
Serve with meat, fish, or grains.


CAPER SAUCE.

Prepare as number one, add capers and lemon before serving.


HORSE RADISH SAUCE.

Prepare as number one, adding dried currants and grated horse radish at
the last minute. This is excellent with boiled beef or fish.


MUSTARD SAUCE.

Prepare as number one, adding two to four teaspoonsful of prepared
mustard a minute before serving. Serve with hot or cold boiled beef, or
with hard boiled eggs.


MUSHROOM SAUCE.

Prepare as number one, add the desired amount of dried mushrooms, which
have been soaked in water for several hours, and boil for ten minutes.
Serve with poultry, game or rice.


CREAM SAUCE. No. 1.

Prepare as number one; remove from the fire, add a few tablespoonsful
of hot cream, or the yolk of one or several eggs, which have been
diluted and stirred with a little cold water. Flavor with mace, pepper,
nutmeg, parsley, lemon, or vanilla. Serve with macaroni, boiled fish,
plum pudding, French toast, chipped beef, salted meat or boiled onions.


CREAM SAUCE. No. 2.

Thicken some water or soup stock with flour. Cook ten minutes, and add
hot cream and flavoring.


ALMOND SAUCE.

Prepare with hot water as directed for butter sauce. Stir smooth a
tablespoonful of almond butter or paste with two tablespoonsful of cold
water, remove the sauce from the fire, add the almond butter and stir
thoroughly. Serve with baked apples, rice, or bread.


OLIVE SAUCE.

Prepare as butter sauce. Soak some olives in warm water, remove the
stones and add to the sauce, boiling all a few minutes. Serve with
duck, game, fish or meat.


DRIED CURRANT SAUCE.

Soak the currants in boiling water, and let stand thirty minutes.
Prepare a plain butter sauce from butter, flour, and hot water, and
when done mix the currants with it. It can be prepared with soup stock
or fish-water, and served with boiled white fish or boiled beef.


BACON SAUCE.

Cut some bacon into pieces about the size of lump sugar. Fry until
brown. Pour the fat into a stone jar and put the bacon on a plate. Mix
a tablespoonful of the bacon fat and one of butter with a tablespoonful
of flour, and add hot water, whey, or soup stock. Flavor with chopped
parsley or strained tomato juice and add the bacon.


FLAVORING OF MEATLESS SOUPS AND SAUCES.

Soups and sauces prepared with flour and water may be improved by an
addition of left-over meat gravies or with crisp bacon and flavored
with finely cut onions.


MINT SAUCE.

Wash half a handful of young fresh mint, pick the leaves from the
stalks, and chop them very fine. Make a plain butter sauce with soup
stock, and add vinegar and sugar to suit the taste. Then remove from
the fire, mix with the chopped mint, and serve with lamb or mutton.


LEMON SAUCE.

Wash a lemon, remove the peel and steep in three cups of water for
fifteen minutes. Add the juice of one or two lemons and the necessary
amount of sugar. Dissolve three teaspoonsful of cornstarch with a
little cold water and stir into the lemon juice. Boil ten minutes.
Remove from the fire and mix with a tablespoonful of butter while warm.
The lemon rind can be grated and added to the sauce instead of boiling
the rind. This is good for steamed puddings. The yolk of an egg may be
added.


CHERRY SAUCE.

Remove the stones and steep the cherries in water with a stick of
cinnamon. Add a little sugar and thicken with cornstarch or arrowroot.
Strain or leave the cherries in it.


DRIED CHERRY SAUCE.

Soak the cherries and prepare as the foregoing. Strain, if desired.


WHITE WINE SAUCE.

Mix a teaspoonful of flour with two tablespoonsful of sugar, a little
cinnamon, and ten ounces of wine. Then beat up four eggs, mix with the
wine and beat over a hot fire with an egg beater until it foams. (It
must not boil.) Then pour into a large dish and beat until nearly cold.
Serve with steamed puddings.


RED WINE SAUCE.

Prepare like white wine sauce. Add a little more sugar, and a
teaspoonful of brandy, if desired.


SALAD DRESSINGS FOR MEATS, CEREALS, FISH, VEGETABLES AND FRUITS.

They can be prepared from oil, butter, eggs, cream or nut butter.
Dressings prepared from nut butter are especially good during the
summer months. They can be prepared by making a plain butter sauce with
flour and water, and adding nut butter before serving, or by diluting
nut butter with water to the desired consistency. They may be flavored
with orange or lemon juice. If a sweet flavor is desired, boil a little
water with sugar, then add the juice of lemon or oranges and mix with
nut butter. Serve hot or cold.


FRENCH DRESSING.

Mix three tablespoonsful of olive oil with one of vinegar, or with the
juice of one lemon and one grated onion. To this may be added sugar,
pepper, salt, parsley or mustard, if desired. The proportion of oil
and vinegar may be changed according to the taste. For fruit salads,
lemon should always be used instead of vinegar. For raw vegetables, the
dressing should not be poured over the salad until ready to serve.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 1.

Put into a high narrow bowl the yolk of an egg and one whole egg,
a tablespoonful of flour, one of olive oil, one of vinegar, and a
little mustard; beat with an egg-beater about five minutes, or until it
becomes thick, adding slowly one cup of cottonseed or olive oil while
beating it. Flavor with lemon juice, onion and salt, to suit the taste.
Keep on ice.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 2.

Stir one or several yolks of eggs and mustard with a fork on a soup
plate for several minutes. Slowly add some olive oil, and if it becomes
too thick, add lemon juice, then salt, sugar and onion, if desired.
Keep on ice.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 3.

Make dressing number two. Add salt and sugar to suit the taste, and one
cup of thick cream. Keep on ice.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 4.

Take the yolks of three hard boiled eggs and one raw yolk. Stir as
smooth as butter, with one teaspoonful of mustard, one of sugar, one of
grated onion, a little salt and pepper, the juice of a lemon or some
good vinegar, then add slowly one-half or one cupful of olive oil. If
the dressing is too thick add some cold veal jelly until it has the
right consistency. Keep on ice.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 5.

Grate one medium sized cold boiled potato, stir one or two hard boiled
eggs through a strainer and mix with the potato. Add the yolk of one or
more eggs, stir well, then slowly add some olive oil, mix with lemon
juice or vinegar, and flavor.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 6.

Cream one-fourth of a pound of butter, add the yolk of one raw egg,
and the finely grated yolks of two hard boiled eggs. Mix well, and add
finely chopped parsley, onion, a little mace and some lemon juice.
Serve with cold meat or fish, or spread on bread.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 7.

Prepare butter and eggs as directed in number six, adding finely
chopped boiled ham, sardellen, anchovies or well soaked salt herring.
Eat with cold meat, or spread on bread.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 8. (BOILED.)

Mix two tablespoonsful of flour with five yolks of eggs, then add a
half cup of butter or a cup of cream, a little salt and pepper, (sugar
if desired), three to four tablespoonsful of vinegar and one to two
cups of soup stock. Pour into a double boiler and stir over a hot fire
until thick, then remove and stir until cool. Finely chopped parsley,
capers, pickles, or olives may be added. If lemon is desired, use half
the amount of vinegar while boiling, and add the lemon juice after it
has been removed from the fire.


MAYONNAISE DRESSING. No. 9. (BOILED.)

Boil a small veal bone in three or four pints of water, adding salt,
several onions, whole pepper and some spiced herbs. When, nearly done,
add three to six tablespoonsful of good vinegar, strain and add the
yolks of several eggs. Stir until cool, and place on ice. Serve with
cold fish or meat. If the sweet-sour taste is liked, a little sugar
may be added to the broth while boiling. Ripe olives are also a good
addition.


SYRUP DRESSING. No. 1.

Add the juice of one lemon, orange, or grapefruit, to one-half cup of
maple or table syrup. Mix well and serve with pancakes. This is more
nourishing and wholesome than pure sweets. Do not prepare more than
enough for one meal at a time.


SYRUP DRESSING. No. 2.

Let a half cup of syrup and a small tablespoonful of vinegar come to
a boil. Add one finely chopped onion. Remove from the fire and cool,
adding the desired amount of oil, and mixing well. This is good for
lettuce and watercress. Serve with pancakes, meats, fish, or baked
rolled oats, or with rye or wheat. If lemons or oranges are used in
place of vinegar, do not allow the latter to boil. Prepare fresh for
each meal. Do not use vinegar or onions with fancy fruits.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                                SALADS.


Salads consisting of =mixed= nuts or =mixed= boiled vegetables are not
wholesome for delicate people.


LETTUCE SALAD.

Lettuce should be kept in a cool, dry place and not left in water
longer than 15 minutes. It may be served alone as a salad mixed with
French dressing or served in combination with fruits, starchy foods or
other vegetables, and eaten in addition to meats and fish or cheese.
Watercress salad can be prepared and served in the same way as lettuce
salad.


MEAT SALAD.

Use any kind of cold left-over meat, cut into small pieces or chopped
fine, mixed with dressing and garnished with green leaves.


FISH SALAD.

Cut some left-over fish in small pieces, mix with dressing and garnish
with leaves.


CUCUMBER SALAD.

Peel and slice the cucumbers thin and pour French or mayonnaise
dressing over them. They may be combined with lettuce, tomatoes,
chopped parsley or onions.


TOMATO SALAD.

Prepare and mix like cucumber salad. Serve with French or mayonnaise
dressing.


BOILED VEGETABLE SALAD.

Use left-over asparagus, string beans, cow beans, lima beans, green
peas or cauliflower. Pour over them French dressing half an hour before
serving, adding lettuce and mayonnaise dressing when ready to serve.


SPINACH SALAD.

Take some fresh leaves of raw spinach or use cold boiled spinach, and
mix with French dressing.


CHEESE SALAD.

Chop up some tart apples, arrange lettuce in a salad bowl, pour in the
apples, and sprinkle over it grated Swiss cheese.


NUT SALAD.

Chop or grind in a nut grinder some almonds or walnuts. Arrange lettuce
and chopped apples in a salad bowl, sprinkle the nuts over it, and
serve with celery and raisins. The French dressing may be omitted.


EGG SALAD.

Arrange lettuce in a salad bowl. Cut up hard boiled eggs, pour over
them French or mayonnaise dressing. Caper or olives may be added.


ANCHOVY BUTTER.

Soak the fish for 20 minutes or longer, wash, clean, and chop fine.
Add several finely chopped yolks of hard boiled eggs, and parsley, if
desired. Cream some sweet butter and mix with the chopped fish and
eggs. Spread on stale slices of bread. Serve with lettuce or celery,
and hard boiled eggs. Apples and tomatoes combine well with all kinds
of fish.

The anchovy butter may be mixed with mayonnaise dressing and served in
egg shells cut in halves.


EMPIRE SALAD.

Ingredients: One large well soaked salt herring, two raw apples, two
cold boiled potatoes, one cup of cold boiled chopped veal or beef,
six hard boiled eggs, three boiled beets, three stalks of celery or
one boiled celery root, onions, parsley, and two tablespoonsful of
mustard. Chop fine each of the ingredients separately. Set apart three
tablespoonsful of chopped whites of eggs, yolks of eggs, beets and
parsley. Mix all the other ingredients well and add about one cup of
mayonnaise dressing. Put the salad on a platter or into a large glass
dish; garnish with lettuce and olives and make designs of green, red,
white, and yellow with left-over ingredients. Let the salad stand in a
cold place for several hours before serving. If it stands too long, the
taste of the herring becomes too strong.


DRIED FISH SALAD.

Soak in warm water for 15 minutes some dried smoked herring or salmon.
Cut in small pieces, mix with mayonnaise or French dressing, and
garnish with lettuce. The fish may be left whole and served with apple
salad.


CABBAGE SALAD.

Use the innermost part of a head of cabbage. Cut and chop very fine,
add lemon and olive oil, and mix with mayonnaise dressing. A cold
grated potato may be added for those who have difficulty in digesting
cabbage.


TOMATO AND WATERCRESS SALAD.

Carefully wash some watercress, dry, and mix with equal parts of sliced
tomatoes. Use French or mayonnaise dressing.


DANDELION SALAD.

Carefully wash and mix with finely cut green onions and French dressing.


YELLOW DOCK SALAD OR SOUR GRASS.

Wash and serve plain or mix with lemon and olive oil.


HERRING SALAD. No. 1.

Remove the skin and bones from a smoked herring. Cut the fish into
small pieces, and mix with thinly sliced apples or tomatoes, and salad
dressing. Garnish with lettuce. Serve with soda crackers or with wheat
or rye bread.


CELERY SALAD.

Cut the tender white stalks into small pieces. Add chopped apples and
nuts or salad dressing.


ANCHOVY SALAD.

Soak the fish for half an hour, remove the bones, fins, and head. Chop
up green onions and parsley. Cut tomatoes or apples into small pieces
and mix with equal parts of fish, add the onions and mix with French or
mayonnaise dressing. Lettuce and hard boiled eggs cut in halves may be
mixed or served with it.


HERRING SALAD. No. 2.

Prepare the same as anchovy salad. Use pickled herring.


RADISH SALAD. No. 1.

Wash and slice some radishes, mix with chopped onions, finely cut
chipped beef or any left-over meat or ham. Garnish with lettuce, and
serve with French or mayonnaise dressing.


OLIVE SALAD.

Stone and slice some ripe olives. Mix with equal parts of thinly sliced
tomatoes and French or mayonnaise dressing. Serve on lettuce.


RHUBARB SALAD.

Wash the rhubarb, cut the red part of it into one inch pieces and mix
with mayonnaise dressing.


APPLE SALAD.

Arrange some lettuce in a salad bowl, add chopped or sliced apples,
onions and parsley, and mix with French or mayonnaise dressing.
Grapenuts or ryenuts may be sprinkled over it. Serve with fish, meat or
cheese.


ASPARAGUS SALAD.

Cut off the tips of raw asparagus, arrange some lettuce or watercress
in a salad bowl, and mix with French or mayonnaise dressing. Sliced
tomatoes may be added. Boiled asparagus may be prepared in the same way.


MUSHROOM SALAD.

Arrange some lettuce or watercress in a dish, select fresh mushrooms,
wash and mix with French dressing, and pour over the green leaves.


BANANA SALAD.

Arrange lettuce and sliced bananas in a salad bowl, adding a French
dressing of lemon and olive oil. Ryenuts or grapenuts may be sprinkled
over it. Scrape off the inside of the skin of the bananas, and mix with
it.


ORANGE SALAD.

Peel some oranges, slice them crossways, remove the seeds, put into a
bowl and grate some of the orange rind over them. Serve plain or with
lettuce, and pour a French dressing of lemon and olive oil over it.


PINEAPPLE SALAD.

Peel and slice crossways, serve with lettuce and lemon or with sweet
cream.


PINEAPPLE AND APPLE SALAD.

Mix equal parts of sliced apples and pineapples. Serve like the
foregoing or with nuts.


PINEAPPLE AND ORANGE SALAD.

Mix equal parts of sliced oranges and pineapples. Serve like the
foregoing.


APPLE AND BANANA SALAD.

Prepare and serve like the foregoing, with cream or nuts.


ORANGE AND BANANA SALAD.

Scrape off the bitter pulp of the inside of the skin of the banana, mix
with sliced oranges and bananas, and serve like the foregoing.


FRUIT SALAD IN GELATINE.

Prepare some lemon or orange gelatine. Let cool and pour over the
sliced fruit. Set on ice and serve plain or with cream.


CRANBERRY AND CELERY SALAD.

Wash and cut some celery the size of cranberries. Mix with an equal
amount of cranberries, and serve plain or with lemon and olive oil.


PEACH SALAD.

Wash and slice some peaches. Serve with cream or lettuce, lemon, and
olive oil. Fried beachnut bacon and shredded, puffed or raw rolled
wheat are a good addition, if lemon and oil is used.


APRICOT SALAD.

Prepare and serve in the same manner as peach salad.


CRANBERRY AND BANANA SALAD.

Cook some cranberries, strain, and thicken with a little cornstarch.
Cool and pour over sliced bananas. Serve with raw celery.


CRANBERRY AND PEAR SALAD.

Combine like the foregoing or use baked pears. Raw cranberries with raw
pears and celery is also good.


BANANA AND GRAPE SALAD.

Slice some bananas and mix with an equal quantity of green grapes.
Garnish with lettuce, and add lemon and olive oil, if desired.


RADISH SALAD. No. 2.

Mix some chopped or sliced radishes with French or mayonnaise dressing,
and add lettuce or celery. Serve for breakfast with whole wheat bread
and butter, or with raw wheat flakes.


BEET SALAD.

Mix some left-over sliced beets with French dressing. Serve with cold
fat pork or bacon for breakfast or dinner. Celery and whole wheat or
black toast with butter make a good combination in place of the meat.


MIXED SPINACH SALAD.

Wash some fresh tender spinach leaves. Cut fine and mix with French
dressing, mint and onions. Tomatoes may be added. Serve with hard
boiled eggs.


CARROT SALAD.

Grind, chop or slice the carrots and mix with French dressing. Add
chopped parsley, lettuce or celery. Serve with rye or wheat flakes or
with bacon.


RAW CORN.

Remove the husks from fresh raw corn and place it in cold salted water
for 15 minutes. Cut from the cob with a sharp knife, and serve plain or
with tomatoes, lettuce and French dressing. This affords a perfect meal
for dinner during the summer.


CELERY ROOT SALAD.

Scrub the roots with a brush and boil in the skins until tender. Peel,
cut into slices, heap in a high bowl, and pour a little diluted vinegar
or lemon juice over them. Let stand for 15 minutes, pour off the acid
and mix with French or mayonnaise dressing. This is good for diabetic
patients.


CEREAL SALAD. No. 1.

Mix a cupful of raw rolled wheat, oats or rye with a cup of finely
grated or chopped carrots. Add a few drops of lemon or orange juice,
and a little olive oil. Lettuce, celery or parsley may be mixed or
eaten with it.


CEREAL SALAD. No. 2.

Wash and chop lettuce or celery, and apples. Mix with French or
mayonnaise dressing. Then add an equal amount of rolled raw cereals and
serve. Parsley or watercress may be added. A syrup dressing or onions
combine well with it. Peaches and apricots may be used in place of
apples and carrots. Onions should not be used with peaches or apricots.




                              CHAPTER IX.

                         GELATINES AND TOASTS.


GELATINE PREPARATIONS.

Gelatine is a valuable food for the sick. The nutritive value of
gelatine is under-estimated. While it alone cannot sustain life, it is
superior to beef tea, and if eaten with other articles which supply the
elements which it lacks, it can partially take the place of meat and
other nitrogenous foods for sick people and for people of sedentary
habits. For people who do hard labor gelatine is of little value.


FRUIT GELATINE.

To prepare fruit gelatine the acid and super-acid fruits are best, and
=no more sugar= should be used than is necessary. Gelatine preparations
must be kept on ice, or in a very cold place, and not be prepared
in large quantities, as they easily putrefy. For the sick and for
children, it should not stand longer than twenty-four hours, and it
should not be kept in metallic dishes. The best time to serve gelatine
is for the evening meal. It may be served with sterilized cream, and
zwieback or wafers.

Prepare some gelatine according to directions on package. Add to it
juice from preserved apples, cherries, raspberries, strawberries or
currants.


GELATINE PUDDING MADE WITH SOUR MILK.

Prepare some white gelatine with two cups of water. Take twice the
amount of gelatine directed and add one-half cup of sugar. Remove from
the fire, cool slightly, then add two cups of sour milk which has been
beaten, and mix all well. Flavor and set in a cool place. Serve with
sweet cream and zwieback.


WHIPPED SOUR MILK.

Beat one quart of thick, sour milk with an egg beater for 10 minutes.
Serve with zwieback in soup plates. Three-fifths tablespoonful of
powdered sugar and a little cinnamon may be added, if it is agreeable.

Whipped sour cream may be prepared the same as sour milk.


WHIPPED SWEET CREAM.

Whip one quart of sweet, thick cream with two-fifths of a tablespoonful
of powdered sugar, add a little vanilla, if desired. Serve with fruit
gelatines or ground white figs, stewed prunes, baked apples or raw
fruits, such as peaches, strawberries, raspberries or bananas.


BANANA GELATINE.

Prepare some gelatine with orange, cranberry or lemon juice. When
nearly cold, cut up some bananas and mix with the gelatine. Flavor and
set on ice, serve with whipped or sterilized cream.


PINEAPPLE GELATINE.

Prepare some gelatine with lemon or orange juice. When nearly cold, add
some fresh or canned pineapple. Serve with whipped or sterilized cream,
and zwieback.


BEER GELATINE.

Prepare with rye beer in the same way as the fruit juice. Take one pint
of beer to one pint of water. Use the imported root beer.


BLANC MANGE

Prepare some gelatine with milk, sugar and a little salt. Remove from
the fire, set on ice, and mix with boiled custard when cool. Flavor
with vanilla or bitter almond.


CALVES’ FOOT JELLY.

Wash a calf’s foot several times in hot and cold water. Bring to a boil
and pour off the first water. Bring to a boil again, add some salt, and
cook from two to three hours. Strain through a cheese-cloth. The next
day remove the fat, bring to a boil again, add one to two cups of wine,
the juice and rind of several lemons or oranges, and sufficient sugar
to counteract the sour taste. Pour into a dish which has been oiled,
and set on ice. It may be served with whipped cream or the beaten
whites of eggs, and shredded wheat or zwieback.


SNOW PUDDING.

Soak some gelatine according to directions. Add a pint of boiling
water, some tart fruit juice and the necessary amount of sugar. Let
it come to a boil, stir and strain, and let stand in a cold place
for several hours. When it begins to set, beat up the whites of two
eggs with a little salt or lemon juice, and sugar, and mix with the
gelatine. Pour into molds and set on ice. Serve with whipped cream or
custard sauce.


RICE GELATINE.

Boil one cup of rice in about three pints of water with a little salt,
for 40 minutes. Soak gelatine, half the amount directed on the package,
and when soft, add the strained rice water to it, bring to a boil,
sweeten to taste, and put into molds or cups. Serve with whipped or
sterilized cream and zwieback. Merk’s sugar of milk should be used if
prepared for the sick.


TOMATO GELATINE.

Strain a can of tomatoes, mix with soaked gelatine and bring to the
boiling point, adding lemon or salt, if desired. Put into molds and set
in a cool place. Serve with cold meat or fish, olives and greens.


BARLEY GELATINE.

Prepare like rice gelatine. Half rice and half barley may be used.
Dried raisins or currants may be added, if desired.


WHEAT GELATINE.

Cook three tablespoonsful of Cream of Wheat with two or three pints of
water and some salt. Boil 20 to 30 minutes. Strain and prepare like
rice gelatine. Flavor according to desire. If the rind of a lemon is
used, boil with the gelatine. This gives it an excellent flavor.


BUCKWHEAT GELATINE.

Wash the buckwheat groats several times with cold water, then soak or
put into boiling water at once. Boil from 30 to 40 minutes. Flavor to
taste. Finish like the foregoing. It is very good during the winter.


OAT GELATINE.

Wash and soak one cupful of steel cut oats in two quarts of water. Add
some bran, if desired. Boil 30 to 40 minutes with a little salt, and
drain and strain. Do not press the starch through. Prepare like rice
gelatine.


BRAN GELATINE.

Soak one cupful of bran in three pints of soft water for several hours,
or over night; one-half cupful of rylax or black crusts may be added.
Bring to a boil slowly and let simmer for 15 or 20 minutes. Soak some
gelatine, a little less than the directions call for. Add the strained
bran juice and a few dried currants which have been soaked in boiling
water. If sugar is desired, add a small tablespoonful. Let it come
almost to the boiling point, add salt, and put into molds. Serve plain
or with sterilized cold cream.


RYE GELATINE.

Prepare like bran gelatine, using less bran. Toast thoroughly brown
three or four slices of stale pompernickel and soak with the bran. If
boiling water is used for soaking, less time will be required for it.
A stick of cinnamon gives the rye a good flavor. Rylax may be used in
place of pompernickel.


PEA GELATINE.

Wash and soak over night one cupful of whole dried green peas in three
pints of soft water. The next day let them slowly come to a boil and
add cut-up onions, carrots, celery or parsley, and salt if desired.
Simmer slowly in earthen ware for one hour at least. Strain and prepare
with gelatine as directed in the foregoing. Do not press the peas hard
through a strainer; allow only a little pulp in the broth. Serve with
zwieback spread with almond butter or with a little finely ground
walnut meat.


COFFEE GELATINE.

Pour two pints of boiling water on four or five tablespoonsful of
coarsely ground coffee. Steep (not boil) for five minutes, then strain.
Soak some gelatine according to directions on package. When soft,
mix with the hot coffee, add sugar to suit the taste, and let it come
almost to the boiling point. Mix well and pour into molds or cups,
which have been rinsed in cold water. Serve with whipped or sterilized
cream, and zwieback or Nabisco.


CEREAL COFFEE GELATINE.

Prepare some strong cereal coffee according to directions on package.
Prepare like the above. A small amount of coffee may be mixed with the
cereal coffee, just before removing from the fire.


CHOCOLATE GELATINE.

Grate eight tablespoonsful of chocolate, put into a pint of cold sweet
milk, bring to a boil, and add a few tablespoonsful of sugar. Soak
some gelatine, and when soft, add one pint of hot milk and heat to the
boiling point. Then mix with the hot milk containing the chocolate,
pour into molds or cups, and set in a cool place. Serve with cream,
zwieback or Nabisco.

For invalids, it is better to prepare the gelatine and chocolate in
water instead of milk, and serve with whipped or sterilized cream.


WINE GELATINE.

Use part wine, sherry or claret. Prepare like fruit gelatine. Serve
with cream or custard sauce, and wafers.


BREAD GELATINE.

Toast two slices of white and two slices of black bread. Pour three
pints of boiling water on them. Simmer for half an hour. Soak some
gelatine, and when dissolved, strain the bread-water and add to the
gelatine. Bring to a boil, add sugar, and flavor with a little wine or
lemon juice. Pour it into molds and cool.


BEAN GELATINE.

Prepare like pea gelatine with or without flavoring. Lima beans or
horse beans are best in summer; small white beans in the fall; red,
brown, or black beans are best in cold weather, as they are richer in
iron and minerals. They can all be served plain with toast or zwieback
and butter, cream or nut preparations. Black toast or crusts combine
better with lima and white beans than white toast or bread.


LENTIL GELATINE.

Prepare like the foregoing. Flavor richly with onions. Serve with white
toast.


TOASTS.


WATER TOAST.

Use zwieback, or toast some stale white bread over the open fire. Lay
on a plate and pour over it quickly boiling water, slightly salted, and
drain off at once. Serve plain, or spread with sweet butter, or the
yolk of an egg.


TOMATO TOAST.

Prepare like the foregoing, spreading with tomato puree in place of
butter. Drink with it rich fresh milk. This is excellent for people who
have difficulty in digesting milk. Strained hot tomato juice may be
used in place of water.


BARLEY TOAST.

Prepare like tomato toast. Use thick, barley jelly prepared from pearl
barley, or soften the toast with barley water.


RICE TOAST.

Use thick rice jelly prepared from Carolina rice. Flavor with cinnamon,
if desired.


RYE OR BRAN TOAST.

Make a strong tea from toasted black bread and bran, and prepare like
the foregoing.


PRUNE TOAST.

Soften some black or white toast with boiling water, and add a little
salt. Spread with thick prune juice. Sterilized cream may be added.


APRICOT TOAST.

Prepare the same as prune toast. Add cream or a piece of butter and the
yolk of an egg.


APPLE TOAST.

Use thick apple sauce. Prepare the same as apricot toast. The four last
recipes are excellent for constipation.


MILK TOAST.

Scald some fresh milk. Add a stick of cinnamon, if desired. Pour over
white or black toast.


CREAM TOAST. No. 1.

Prepare like water toast. Bring some fresh cream to a boil with a stick
of cinnamon. Add when the toast is soft. Use black or white toast.


CREAM TOAST. No. 2.

Prepare a white sauce from butter, salt, flour and hot water, as
directed in “Sauces.” Add one-fourth of a cup of hot cream and pour
over black toast, which has been softened with one-half cup of hot
water.


CREAM TOAST. No. 3.

Use sweet whey in place of hot water, and prepare as No. 2. The cream
may be omitted.


CELERY TOAST.

Cut some celery and cook until tender. Soften the toast with the celery
water. Prepare a plain butter sauce and add cream, if desired. Mix with
the celery and pour over the toast.


CLAM TOAST. No. 1.

Soften the toast with hot clam broth and strain, if desired. Mix the
remainder with hot cream and pour over the toast.


CLAM TOAST. No. 2.

Soften the toast with clam broth. Prepare a white sauce from the
remainder, add hot cream and pour over the toast.


OYSTER TOAST.

Prepare like the clam toast, with or without cream.


SPINACH TOAST.

Cut off the stems and select only fresh tender leaves. Cook and chop as
fine as possible, flavoring with butter and lemon juice. Soften some
black or white toast with broth or spinach water, and add the spinach.
Serve with hard boiled eggs for dinner. If it is desired for supper,
and if the patient’s stomach is delicate, use only the hard yolks.
Fried beachnut bacon may be added. If the flavor of onion is desired,
remove the onion before serving. This is good for constipation.


EGG TOAST. No. 1.

Beat one egg with three tablespoonsful of water or soup stock, and a
little salt. Let the toast soften in it and fry to a golden brown in
one-half butter and half vegetable fat or oil.


EGG TOAST. No. 2.

Use cream or unsweetened condensed milk. Beat up with eggs, salt and
cinnamon, and prepare like the foregoing. This is good for diabetic
patients.




                              CHAPTER X.

                     FRUITS, PUDDINGS AND GRUELS.


STERILIZED DRIED FRUITS.

Place some dried cherries, apricots, currants or prunes in a Mason jar.
Fill to the top, cover with water, and let stand over night. The next
day set the jar into a water bath, heat to the boiling point, then
cool. Enough can be prepared to last for several days. The juice may be
used again for soaking, or it can be used for fruit gruels.


SOAKED FRUIT. No. 1.

Wash some dried fruit, put into a bowl, pour over some hot or cold
water, place over it a little saucer with a weight upon it; in this way
it requires less water; let stand over night. It is ready for use the
next morning, and may be mixed with boiled cereals in place of sugar.


SOAKED FRUIT. No. 2.

Place some dried fruit in a bowl, pour over it some hot cereal coffee.
Use in the same way as number one. This is excellent for people
suffering with fermentation of the stomach. The cereal coffee acts as a
preservative.


FIG BUTTER. No. 1.

Wash some dried figs, dry them; then cut into small pieces, and grind
on a nut grinder. Mix with one-fourth (in quantity) of ryenuts. Serve
with whipped or sterilized cream.


FIG BUTTER. No. 2.

Prepare as the foregoing. Mix with about one-third or one-fourth of
ground nuts, also with ryenuts, if desired. Serve with lettuce.


RAISIN OR CURRANT BUTTER.

Prepare like figs. Mix with ground nuts. Serve with lettuce or with
chopped apples.


GROUND DATES.

Remove the stones and prepare as above. Mix with ryenuts or orange
juice. Serve with lettuce and sliced bananas or nuts.


GROUND DRIED PRUNES.

Prepare like figs. Mix with ryenuts. Serve with cream or with nuts and
lettuce.


BAKED APPLES.

Wash and remove the core; then place in a baking tin, stem end down;
pour over some water and a little sugar, if desired, bake in a moderate
oven until tender. Let cool and serve plain with butter and bread or
with whipped or sterilized cream.


BAKED PEACHES.

Prepare the same as baked apples, and serve with cream.


AMBROSIA.

Mash baked apples very fine and rub through a colander. Mix with soaked
or stewed raisins, if desired. Serve in place of apple sauce with
beaten whites of egg or whipped cream and zwieback.


BAKED APPLES IN GELATINE.

Prepare in the usual way, pour some fruit or rye gelatine over them.


APPLE SAUCE. No. 1.

Wash some tart apples, cut into four pieces and remove the seeds; steep
with a little water and sugar until tender. Then mash fine with a
potato masher and run through a colander. Add a piece of butter while
warm. Apple sauce prepared in this way is more wholesome than prepared
from apples that have been peeled.


APPLE SAUCE. No. 2.

Soak some dried apples over night, steep for 30 or 40 minutes with
a piece of cinnamon and a little sugar, and mash fine with a potato
masher. Add a piece of butter. Let cool and serve with fish, eggs,
boiled beef or cheese.


APPLE SNOW.

Prepare some apple sauce from dried or fresh apples, run through a
colander; when cool, mix with the snow of whites of eggs. Serve with
zwieback.


APRICOT SNOW.

Prepare same as apple snow.


APRICOT SAUCE.

Wash some dried apricots thoroughly, cut into small pieces, soak over
night, then simmer slowly until soft. Run through a colander and add a
piece of fresh butter while warm. Serve with French toast, corn bread,
corn cakes, steamed puddings or omelet; also good with fish and meats,
especially fat meats.


GOOSEBERRY COMPOTE.

Remove the stems, wash the berries and pour some boiling water on them.
Let stand 5 minutes; then pour off the water and add fresh boiling
water, a stick of cinnamon and the necessary amount of sugar. Thicken
with cornstarch. Serve with unleavened pancakes.


GOOSEBERRY PUDDING.

Prepare the gooseberries in the same manner as for compot, but use more
water. When done, strain and thicken with cornstarch. Let boil 10 to 15
minutes. Serve hot or cold with cream.


STEWED BLACKBERRIES.

Wash a pint of blackberries, put on to cook with about two pints of
boiling water and a stick of cinnamon. Let simmer slowly and add a
few tablespoons of sugar. When nearly done thicken with a little
cornstarch. Cool and serve with milk rice, custard or pancakes.


STEWED HUCKLEBERRIES.

Prepare the same as stewed blackberries. Strain, if desired.


BAKED APPLES IN OIL.

Wash some tart apples, wipe and core them. Have some vegetable oil,
goose grease or lard boiling hot, drop in the apples and cook until
tender. Let cool and reheat when needed.


BEER GRUEL.

Soak a half cup of instantaneous tapioca with a half cup of water for
10 minutes. Bring a cup of water and a cup of beer with a stick of
cinnamon to a boil, stir in the tapioca, let boil to minutes, add sugar
and salt. Then remove from the fire, add three to five tablespoonsful
of fresh hot cream and serve. A piece of butter and the yolk of an egg
can serve as substitute for the cream. Serve with zwieback.


APPLE TAPIOCA.

Prepare as the foregoing, from apple cider or unfermented apple juice.
Serve with cream or with butter and the yolk of an egg. Hot or cold.
Serve with zwieback or wafers.


TOMATO TAPIOCA.

Use one cup of strained tomato juice to one of water. Prepare as the
above. Serve with cream and zwieback.


BERRY TAPIOCA.

Cook one quart of raspberries or blackberries with two quarts of water,
a piece of cinnamon, add three-fourths to one cup of sugar, let boil
slowly, then, strain and cool. Reheat and prepare with instantaneous
tapioca. Pour on a soup plate, pour sterilized cream over it. In cold
weather, the cream as well as the tapioca should be served warm.


RHUBARB PUDDING.

Wash the stalks and cut off the green end. Cut the remainder in small
pieces and steep in earthenware with a stick of cinnamon. When, tender,
strain and add the necessary amount of sugar. Dissolve some cornstarch,
arrowroot or agar-agar with cold water and stir into the fruit juice.
Let boil 10 minutes and serve warm on soup-plates with sterilized cream
or put into molds and cool. If it is eaten warm, it is preferable to
let the fruit juice cool first, then reheat and add the thickening.


APPLE PUDDING.

Save all the peeling from several days; add a few whole apples. Cook
with water, strain and prepare like rhubarb pudding.


CURRANT, RASPBERRY OR PEACH PUDDING.

Prepare the same as the foregoing. If peaches or peach skins are used,
do not press much of the pulp through. It is better to use more peeling
than whole fruits. In serving peach or apple salad, the peelings can be
saved from a day or two and preserved by stewing them in a little water
until ready for use.


LEMON FILLING FOR PIE.

Stir the yolks of three eggs with one-half cup of sugar, add the grated
rind and juice of two lemons or one lemon and one orange, then add two
tablespoons of cornstarch, one of butter and one and one-half cup of
hot water. Stir in a double boiler over the fire until it is thick.
Then pour it into the baked crust. Beat the whites with a tablespoon of
sugar and a little lemon juice. Put over the top and brown in the oven.


STRAWBERRIES WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

Select fresh ripe berries and wash. Put the desired amount on flat
medium-sized plates. Beat up some cream with the whites of several eggs
and a little powdered sugar. Cover the berries with the cream and serve
with wafers or triscuit.


PEACHES AND PEARS WITH WHIPPED CREAM.

Peel and slice them. Prepare and serve the same as the foregoing. These
dishes are not good for delicate stomachs.


PLAIN JUNKET.

Warm one pint of milk to blood heat, flavor as desired; stir in one
junket tablet which has been dissolved in a little water and pour into
a dish; set on ice. Serve with cranberry or prune sauce and wafers.


WINE GRUEL.

Bring equal parts of white or red wine and water to a boil, flavor with
lemon rind or cinnamon, add sugar, thicken with instantaneous tapioca
or with potato flour. Serve plain or add a piece of butter and the yolk
of an egg.


WINE GRUEL OF PORT OR SHERRY.

Soak some plain sago or tapioca for about three hours, then pour into
boiling water, add sugar, lemon rind, and a pinch of salt. When almost
done, add port or sherry (one to three ounces to one person). Serve
plain, or with butter and the yolk of an egg.


WINE GRUEL OF RED CLARET.

Bring equal parts of wine and water to a boil, thicken with potato
flour or instantaneous tapioca, add sugar and a little salt, add a
small amount of preserved raspberries or strawberries, jam or jellies,
or sliced pineapple. The whites of several eggs beaten to a snow with a
little salt may be mixed with it before serving. Zwieback or wafers is
a good addition.


RICE GRUEL. No. 1.

Mix two to three tablespoonsful of rice flour with a little cold water,
add to it a pint of boiling water, two level tablespoonsful of sugar
of milk, salt to taste, boil fifteen to twenty minutes. Put on a soup
plate, pour hot or cold sterilized cream over it.


RICE GRUEL. No. 2.

Prepare as number one. After removing from the fire, add a piece of
butter, and the yolk of an egg, mix thoroughly, then put on a soup
plate. Serve with or without cream.


CHOCOLATE CORNSTARCH.

Bring a pint of water to a boil, mix with two tablespoonsful of
chocolate, let boil two minutes, then thicken with two tablespoons of
cornstarch. Flavor with salt and vanilla. Pour on a soup plate. Serve
with sterilized cream, hot or cold.


BOILED CUSTARD.

Bring one pint of sweet cream or rich milk and one pint of water to a
boil with a piece of vanilla. Then mix one tablespoonful of cornstarch
with a little cold water and three yolks of eggs, two tablespoonsful of
sugar, and a little salt. Add all to the boiling milk, stir over the
fire or in a double boiler until it thickens. Remove and beat until
nearly cold. Put on ice. It may be served with zwieback and fruit juice
or with fresh berries. For dyspeptics, it is better if prepared with
water and butter instead of milk and served with sterilized cream.


BLACKBERRY SAGO.

Boil one quart of blackberries with about two quarts of water and some
sugar very slowly, then strain and cool, bring to a boil again, prepare
with instantaneous tapioca or plain sago. The latter must be well
soaked. Serve warm with zwieback or wafers and sweet butter.


APPLE SAGO.

Boil tart apples with the skin in plenty of water; when tender strain
and cool. Reheat, flavor with cinnamon and sugar. Prepare with
instantaneous tapioca or plain sago. After removing from the fire
add orange juice, lemon, butter and the yolk of an egg or serve with
sterilized cream.


ONION GRUEL. No. 1.

Cut fine three or four onions, stew them in a quart of water very
slowly and keep them well covered. When tender strain; heat butter or
olive oil and thicken with mixed flour; add the onion broth slowly, let
boil a few minutes. Flavor with salt and lemon. One-half soup stock and
one-half onion broth may be used. Cream can be added if desired.


ONION GRUEL. No. 2.

Put one-half of a cup of barley to soak, boil with four dried or green
onions. Add salt, and strain.


BREAD GRUEL. No. 1. (WITH BARLEY.)

Soak and boil one-half cup of barley with salt in three pints of water,
very tender, until there remains about a cup of liquid. Strain this.
Then, take some French bread or soda crackers, pour sufficient boiling
water and a tablespoonful of milk sugar or cane sugar on it, let stand
until it is perfectly soft, or until the water is all soaked into the
bread. Then add the cup of barley water, let all boil for a few minutes
or until bread and barley are well united. It may be strained, if
desired.


BREAD GRUEL. No. 2. (WITH BRAN.)

Take a cup of select bran, simmer slowly with two pints of water and a
little salt, while boiling, add three tablespoonsful of milk sugar or a
teaspoonful of can sugar. Strain, finish like bread gruel number one.
Add dried soaked sweet fruit, if desired.


BREAD GRUEL. No. 3. (WITH OATS AND BRAN.)

Take one-third of steel cut oats and two-thirds of bran. Prepare like
bread gruel number one. Add sweet fruits, if desired.


OATMEAL GRUEL. (WITH BRAN.)

Soak a half cup of steel cut oats or rolled oats and a cup of bran. Put
on to boil with three pints of cold or boiling water and salt. Let boil
slowly for three-fourths of an hour. Strain, add butter and serve. This
is excellent for nursing mothers. Use more water if it is desired thin.


CORNMEAL GRUEL.

Put one-half to three-fourths of a cup of corn meal to boil with three
pints of boiling water and some salt. Let boil fast during the first
ten minutes, then set aside and boil slowly for twenty or thirty
minutes. Remove from the fire, add a small tablespoonful of butter, the
yolk of an egg and a few drops of lemon; the rind of the lemon may be
grated over it. Mix all well, pour on a soup plate, eat plain or with
hot sterilized cream. The butter, egg and lemon, may be left out, and
cream added only.


CODFISH GRUEL.

Soak two tablespoonsful of shredded codfish for twenty minutes, change
the water several times. Add boiling water and flavor with onion. Heat
butter or olive oil, thicken with mixed flour, add the onion water
slowly, at last the soaked codfish. Let all boil a few minutes. Chopped
parsley and hot cream may be added, if desired. Serve with toast.


BARLEY GRUEL.

Soak a half cup of pearl barley, put on to boil with three pints of
water, add salt and three tablespoonsful of milk sugar. Let boil slowly
for one hour, then strain. Heat a tablespoonful of butter, thicken
with mixed flour, add the barley gruel gradually, let all boil a few
minutes, then serve.


WHEAT GRUEL.

Put two to three tablespoons of cream of wheat or farina into a
saucepan. Add a pint of boiling water, a pinch of salt, and a
tablespoon of milk sugar. Let boil half an hour. Remove from the fire
and mix with a teaspoon of butter or two to three ounces of hot cream.
Dried soaked raisins or currants may be added.


GLUTEN GRUEL.

Prepare as directed on package. Add cream or butter and the yolk of an
egg.


RAW CEREAL GRUEL.

Soak one-half to one-third cup of flaked raw cereal with a cup or more
of warm salted water. Let stand for several hours or over night in a
warm place. Serve plain or with sweet dried fruits and fresh cream.


MIXED FLOUR GRUEL. No. 1.

Mix two tablespoonsful of mixed flour with a little cold water, add two
to three cups of boiling water, salt and a tablespoonful of milk sugar.
Let boil ten to fifteen minutes, remove from the fire. Add two to four
ounces of hot cream. Flavor with vanilla, cinnamon, grated lemon rind
or bitter almond.


MIXED FLOUR GRUEL. No. 2.

Put to boil the same amount of flour as in number one. Use a cup of
rich milk and one and one-half of water instead of water alone. Flavor
and serve.


ARROWROOT GRUEL.

Prepare the same as mixed flour gruel. Add hot cream.


NUT GRUEL. No. 1.

Mix two tablespoonsful of mixed flour with a little cold water, add two
to three cups of boiling water, salt, and a teaspoonful of sugar, if
desired. Boil 10 to 15 minutes. Stir a tablespoonful of almond-butter
or combination nut-butter with one or two tablespoonsful of water to a
smooth paste, add the gruel gradually, mix all well and serve.


NUT GRUEL. No. 2.

Heat a tablespoonful of butter in a flat saucepan, thicken with mixed
flour, add two cups of boiling water, and salt, let boil a few
minutes. Stir smooth a teaspoonful of almond-butter with cold water,
add the gruel, mix well, flavor with lemon, if desired.


SAGO GRUEL.

Wash and soak a half cup of sago for several hours in a cup or more
of cold water. Put into three cups of boiling water, add salt, a
tablespoonful of milk sugar, or a teaspoonful of cane sugar, a stick of
cinnamon, vanilla or lemon rind. Boil the sago 20 to 30 minutes. Remove
from the fire, add three to six ounces of hot cream. Less sago may be
used and a tablespoonful of rice flour dissolved with cold water added
to it while boiling.


CORNSTARCH GRUEL.

Mix two tablespoonsful of cornstarch with a little cold water, add
three cups of boiling water, salt, a tablespoonful of milk sugar or
a teaspoonful of cane sugar, boil 10 to 15 minutes. Add two to three
ounces of hot cream. One-half of rice flour and one-half of cornstarch
may be used in place of pure cornstarch. Flavor as desired.


MILK GRUEL. No. 1.

Mix a tablespoonful of rice flour and one of cornstarch with a little
cold water. Add one quart of boiling milk. Boil 10 to 20 minutes. Add
salt and flavor, as desired.


MILK GRUEL. No. 2.

Bring one pint of milk and one pint of water to a boil. Dissolve two or
three tablespoons of white flour with a little cold water and stir into
the hot milk. Let boil 10 to 15 minutes. A stick of cinnamon, vanilla
or lemon rind can be boiled with the milk. If the flavor of almonds is
desired, grate one bitter-almond on it after it is removed from the
fire. The yolk of an egg may be added, if desired.


PEPTONIZED GRUEL.

Prepare a gruel from any farinaceous article. Pour into a bowl and
allow it to stand until lukewarm. Add peptonized powder according to
direction.




                              CHAPTER XI.

                                FLUIDS.


STERILIZED MILK.

Put the desired amount of milk into clean sterilized bottles, put in
cotton stopper, set on a grate and heat in a water bath to 170° F. or
212° F. Keep the milk at this temperature for 40 minutes or longer,
then remove from the fire; when the water has cooled take out the
bottles and place them on ice.

Recipes for the preparation of different forms of peptonized milk can
be found in the directions given with digestive ferments, when bought
at the drug store.


KUMYSS.

Dissolve one-fourth of a cake of compressed yeast in a little warm
water. Take a quart of fresh blood-warm milk, add to it a tablespoonful
of sugar and the yeast. Put the mixture into beer bottles with patent
stoppers, filling them to the neck. Place them for about twelve hours
in a room suitable for raising bread, at a temperature of about 70°,
then put the bottles on ice, up side down, until wanted.


RICE WATER.

Wash one-half a cup of Carolina rice several times with water, then
soak or put on to boil at once with three pints of water. Boil slowly
for about an hour, strain, and sweeten, or flavor as desired. Serve
plain or with one-fifth part of sterilized cream.


BARLEY WATER.

Prepare in the same manner as rice water.


EAGLE BRAND CONDENSED MILK.

It can be prepared in many different ways, and mixed with barley-water,
and cream, or used for sweetening in the preparation of gruels.


TOAST WATER.

Toast a slice of stale wheat or black bread until thoroughly brown.
Break into small pieces and pour on it two or three cups of boiling
water. Cover tightly, and set aside for twenty minutes or longer.
Strain, and flavor to suit the taste. Serve hot or cold.


TOAST AND APPLE WATER.

Prepare like toast water, and add the peelings of one or two apples
before pouring on the boiling water.


LEMONADE.

Boil a quart of water for several minutes with three to five
tablespoonsful of sugar, and the rind of one lemon. Remove from the
fire, add the juice of two or three lemons or oranges, strain and
cool. Fresh clean cold water may be added to suit the taste. This is
excellent in fevers, where much fluid food is required. It may be
served hot or cold.


BRAN TEA.

Soak over night a cupful of Ralston’s select bran in one quart of
soft warm or cold water. The next day strain it and serve raw, or put
it on to boil, simmer for one-half hour, then strain. Serve hot or
cold. The bran may be mixed with oats or ryenuts when put to soak, and
may be used raw or boiled. Hot bran tea with cream is excellent as a
substitute for tea. It can be prepared without soaking.


BEEF JUICE. No. 1.

Broil one pound of thick round steak, cut into small pieces and press
the juice out with a lemon squeezer or meat press. It may be served
with or without lemon juice and be diluted with warm water, if desired.
When heating, do not coagulate the albumen by boiling, but place the
cup or bottle containing the juice in a kettle of warm water.


BEEF JUICE. No. 2.

Grind or chop some round steak, put into a quart jar and fill with
warm water. Place the jar in warm water and let stand three or four
hours. The temperature must not rise above 155° F. Strain through a
cheese-cloth, and flavor with a little lemon or salt.


BEEF BROTH.

Wash a beef bone thoroughly with hot and cold water. Put on to boil
and cook very slowly for three or four hours. It may be flavored
with onion, potato or soup greens. Strain through a fine strainer
or cheese-cloth. Serve hot or cold. If a few teaspoonsful of hot
sterilized cream or the yolk of an egg is added before serving it will
improve the taste and make it more nutritious.


JULIENNE BROTH.

Soak the desired amount of dried vegetable. Prepare as directed on
package. Add some soup stock or beef extract before serving.


VEAL BROTH OR JELLY.

Take a bone of veal without meat, wash it thoroughly first with cold
and then with warm water. Bring to a boil with cold water and pour
off the first water. Bring to a boil again with hot or cold water,
skim carefully, add salt, and let it simmer gently for several hours.
Strain through a fine sieve or cheese-cloth. When cool set on ice. If
thickening is desired, cook one-half a cup of Cook’s flaked rice in an
equal amount of water, and add a little salt. Mix with one-half a cup
of veal jelly, and serve. A few tablespoons of cream may be added to
it, or the broth may be served clear with zwieback.


BROTH WITH EGG.

Stir the yolk of an egg with two tablespoonsful of cold water until
well mixed. Then gradually add eight to fifteen ounces of broth. Stir
constantly to prevent the egg from curdling. If the whole egg is
desired, beat it with an egg-beater and prepare in same way. Less than
eight ounces of broth to one egg will make it too rich. A few drops of
lemon may be added.


TOMATO AND VEAL JELLY.

Mix an equal amount of strained veal broth and strained tomato juice.
Let cool and serve. If freshly strained canned tomatoes are used, do
not cook the tomatoes. If it stands longer than twelve hours, bring to
the boiling point in order to prevent fermentation.


VEAL JELLY.

Veal jelly may be flavored in many different ways. It is better to cook
the stock with salt only. In this way the flavor can be changed each
time by adding vegetable broth obtained by boiling vegetables in a
small amount of water and straining. Onions are a very good flavoring.
A great variety of vegetables should not be used at one time.


MALTED MILK. No. 1.

Put two teaspoonsful of malted milk into a cup, pour on some boiling
water and add a pinch of salt and one-fourth of a cup of cream.


MALTED MILK. No. 2.

Prepare as the foregoing, omitting the cream. Serve plain, or add a few
drops of lemon juice.


UNFERMENTED BEER.

Soak a cup of bran and a slice of thoroughly toasted black bread for
several hours in a quart of water. Add a stick of cinnamon, bring to a
boil and let simmer slowly for 20 minutes or longer. Strain and serve
hot or cold.


CAMOMILE TEA.

Put a tablespoonful of tea into a teapot and pour on it one-half a pint
of boiling water. Allow it to stand on a hot platter or over steam for
5 minutes. Then strain and serve.


FENNEL TEA.

Prepare the same as camomile tea.


BUCKTHORN TEA.

Put two tablespoonsful of buckthorn bark into a teapot, pour on it a
cup of boiling water, and allow to steep from 10 to 15 minutes. Strain
and serve warm (not hot).


WHEY. No. 1.

Soak one of Hansen’s rennet tablets in a little cold water. Heat one
quart of skim milk or fresh milk until it is lukewarm. Crush the tablet
and mix with the milk, and stand on a warm place for 5 minutes or until
it is thick. Then heat over the fire until the whey separates. Strain
and throw away the curd.


WHEY. No. 2.

Heat some fresh milk until it is blood-warm. Add Fairchild’s essence of
pepsin, according to directions.


IRISH MOSS.

Wash and let it soak for several hours, or over night. Boil for 10
minutes, strain through cheese-cloth, and add one-half or two-thirds of
a cup of hot milk. Flavor as desired.


RAW GREEN PEA JUICE.

Wash some fresh green peas in the pods and grind through a meat
grinder, allowing the liquid to drain into a bowl.


LEMON WHEY.

Heat a pint of fresh milk to about 200° F., remove from the fire and
squeeze into it the juice of one-half a lemon. Let stand for a few
minutes, beat with a fork, and strain through a cheese-cloth. Serve hot
or cold.


ALBUMEN WATER.

Add to the white of one fresh egg eight ounces of water and a little
lemon juice or brandy, and shake thoroughly. Keep on ice.


FLAXSEED TEA.

Add a quart of water to two tablespoonsful of whole flax seed. Boil one
or two hours with one or two tablespoonsful of sugar. Strain and add
lemon juice or cream, to suit the taste.


APPLE BARLEY WATER.

Soak a cup of barley over night. Put to boil with two quarts of water,
add a little salt and the skins of two or three apples, and a little
sugar. Boil slowly for an hour or until it becomes red in color.
Strain, and add lemon juice, if desired. Serve hot or cold.


WATER EGGNOG. No. 1.

Beat the whole of an egg with one-half a cup or less of water. Flavor
with lemon juice.


WATER EGGNOG. No. 2.

Beat the yolk of an egg with one-half or a whole cup of water. Flavor
with lemon juice.


LEMONADE WITH EGG.

Take some lemonade prepared from oranges and lemons and add to it the
yolk or the whole of an egg. The acid taste must dominate the sweet
taste.


MILK EGGNOG.

Beat up the whole or the yolk of an egg with a little water and some
brandy, sherry, cognac or whiskey, and one or two teaspoonsful of
sugar. To this add eight to ten ounces of rich raw or sterilized milk,
or one-half cream and one-half water. Flavor with nutmeg or bitter
almond.


FRUIT LEMONADE.

Boil some water with a little sugar and the rind of a lemon, orange or
apple. Add to it some preserved strawberry, cherry, pineapple, currant
or raspberry juice, and seltzer water, or add a mixture of several
different fruit juices. This is excellent for fever patients, but not
for people suffering with lung or heart diseases.


ALMOND MILK.

Blanch one cup of almond meats, chop or grind them coarsely, and pour
over them a quart of hot water. Let stand several hours or over night,
press through a cheese-cloth, and keep on ice. A few bitter almonds may
be added.


BEER LEMONADE.

Wash a half cup of dried currants or raisins, put on to boil with
a pint of water, a tablespoonful of rye nuts or black toast, a
piece of cinnamon, some lemon rind and one or two tablespoonsful of
sugar. Simmer slowly for fifteen minutes, add a pint of Munchener’s
Spatenbraü, let it boil for one minute, and strain. Keep in a cool
place. Serve hot or cold.


STRAWBERRY MILK.

Wash two cups of fresh strawberries. Put into a milk-pitcher and add
two quarts of fresh raw or cold boiled milk, a little vanilla and a
small piece of ice. Strain, serve with zwieback or shredded wheat.
Sugar may be added, if desired. This is more wholesome than ice cream.


EGG WINE.

Mix thoroughly the yolk of three eggs with three teaspoonsful of sugar.
Add a pint of white or red wine or one-half of wine and one-half of
water. Serve with zwieback or wafers.


TEA.

Rinse the teapot with boiling water. Take a teaspoonful of black Japan
tea, add a pint of boiling water, and let stand over steam for one or
two minutes. Strain, and serve hot or cold with lemon juice or cream.


COFFEE.

Grind very coarsely two tablespoonsful of fresh coffee beans. Pour two
cups of boiling water on them, let stand 5 minutes (do not boil), then
strain. Serve black or with cream. Tea and coffee should be used for
medicinal purposes only.


MALT OR CEREAL COFFEE.

Take one-half cup of instantaneous Postum or Kneipp’s malt coffee,
pour three or four cups of boiling water on it. Let stand from 5 to 15
minutes, then strain. Serve hot or cold, with or without cream. People
who wish to leave off coffee may add a teaspoonful of coffee beans to
the cereal coffee a few minutes before straining. In this way they will
gradually lose the desire for coffee. Bran tea or legume tea may be
substituted for black tea or coffee.


COCOA. No. 1.

Dissolve one teaspoonful of cocoa and one of sugar in a little boiling
water or milk and add a cup of rich milk. Let all boil a few minutes.
Hot or whipped cream may be added before serving.


COCOA. No. 2.

Dissolve one-half a teaspoonful of cocoa and one teaspoonful of milk
sugar in a little boiling water, add one cup of hot rich milk or
one-half cup of cream and water, and boil a few minutes. Add more
cream, if desired.


COCOA SHELLS.

Boil cocoa shells for twenty minutes, then strain. Use as a substitute
for tea or coffee.


BEAN TEA.

Use white, brown or black beans; soak one-half cup of beans in warm
soft water over night. The next day put on to boil in a quart of water,
cook slowly for one hour or longer, and keep covered well. Then strain
and serve plain, or add some hot cream to it. Small white and lima
beans are excellent in the summer.


PEA AND LENTIL TEA.

Prepare the same as bean tea. Dry green peas are richer in minerals
than yellow peas. Yellow peas contain more starch.




                              PART THREE




                              CHAPTER I.

                          FOOD REQUIREMENTS.


It is important that the diet should contain the proper amount of
protein, starches and fats, suitable to the individual needs. Age,
weight, size, occupation, season and climate must all be considered.
The majority of civilized men and women consume from two to three times
the amount of food necessary. Numerous and careful researches regarding
food requirements have been made during the last fifty years.

The composition of American food materials and the dietary standards of
Professors Voit and Atwater can be found on the last pages of this book.

The recent experiments of Professor Chittenden, of Yale University,
have demonstrated that 60 grams of protein, with the necessary amount
of fats and carbohydrates to yield from 1500 to 2500 calories per
day, is sufficient. These requirements are regarded as presenting the
minimum of what is necessary for the maintenance of health, strength
and activity. To take more food than the body requires means not only
waste of food, but an unnecessary strain upon the body, by this excess,
which must be gotten rid of at the expense of energy, that could be
more profitably expended for other purposes.

The sample menus given on following pages are taken from the results
of my own experimental work with different people, under different
conditions, and of weights varying from 130 to 160 pounds. They were
people in poor health, suffering from lack of nutrition brought
about by unsuitable food, such as too much protein or starchy foods;
insufficient fats and minerals in the food; excess of cooked foods;
improper combinations and wrong time for eating. Some improved in
health and strength immediately after the change of diet, and were able
to do from eight to twelve hours of active work, while others found
it necessary to take a rest and develop their stomachs gradually by a
change to raw foods.

I am convinced that the amount of protein presented in the sample
bills of fare is sufficient for the average individual, provided the
food is properly masticated, digested and assimilated, and not forced
down by artificial stimulants and poisonous beverages. The amount
of carbohydrates and fat required differs greatly with different
temperaments and individual peculiarities, and must be determined by
the individual himself. Those who can use a considerable amount of
cereals and fruits require less fat, while others who are not so well
able to digest large amounts of starchy foods and fruits require more
fats.

Cooked foods are more easily digested than raw foods, but the nutritive
value is very definitely influenced by the process of cooking;
therefore it is important to consume as much food as possible in the
raw state.


Sample of Daily Food Requirements (roughly described):


TABLE 1.

                             Grams _contain_ Protein  Fats and
                                                  Carbohydrates
Milk                             50          2         4
Rice, barley, noodles or corn   100         12        40
Lean meat                       250         54        32
Greens                          125          3         6
Bread                           200         14        56
Butter                           50         --        34
Oil, ¹⁄₂ cup (or fat meat)      150         --       102
Fruit                           300         --        18
Eggs                            100         12        16
                                            --      ----
                                            97       308


TABLE 2.

Milk                             50          2         4
Rice or any other cereal        100         12        40
Greens                          125          3         6
Potatoes or carrots             100          2        11
Cheese (or nuts or legumes)     100         25        36
Oil, ¹⁄₂ cup (or fat meat)      150         --       102
Fruit                           300         --        18
Bread                           300         21        84
Butter                           50         --        34
                                            --      ----
                                            65       335




SAMPLE MENUS


I. BREAKFAST.

(Winter.)


Pearl barley with hot cream and French prunes. Two soda crackers.

                          Portion of food containing calories
Pearl barley (measured raw)       ¹⁄₃ cup                 450
Cream                             ¹⁄₂ cup                 230
French prunes                     5¹⁄₂                   100
Soda crackers                     4                       100
                                                         ----
                                                          880


DINNER.

Tomato and lettuce salad with mayonnaise dressing. Baked beans with
lemon and fat meat. Carrots.

Tomatoes                          2 raw                   100
Lettuce                           ¹⁄₄ head                 10
Oil                               4 tablesps.             400
Egg                               1 whole                  60
Beans                             ¹⁄₂ cup (raw)           300
Fat meat                          ¹⁄₄ lb.                 650
Carrots                           1 large                  50
Lemon                             Juice of ¹⁄₂              8
                                                         ----
                                                         1578


SUPPER.

Tomato cream soup with toast and raw celery.

Butter                            1 tablesp.              105
Strained tomato juice             1 cup                   100
Cream                             ¹⁄₂ cup                 230
Toast                             2 small slices           75
Celery                            3 stalks (raw)           25
                                                         ----
                                                          535


II. BREAKFAST.

(Summer.)

Strawberries, two boiled eggs with shredded wheat or toast, or raw
wheat flakes.

Strawberries                     1 cup                   60
Eggs                             2                      120
Shredded wheat                   2                      200
Butter                           1 tablesp.             105
                                                       ----
                                                        485


DINNER.

Apple and celery salad with French or mayonnaise dressing. Boiled
codfish with white sauce. Bread and butter. Black unsweetened coffee.

Apple                            1 large                100
Celery                           2 stalks                16
Oil                              4 tablesps.            400
Egg                              1                       60
Lemon                            ¹⁄₂                      8
Fish                             ¹⁄₃ lb.                130
Butter                           2 tablesps.            200
Flour                            1 tablesp.              30
Black Bread                      2 large slices         200
                                                       ----
                                                       1144


SUPPER.

Muskmelon with lemon. Creamed chipped beef on toast.

Melon                            ¹⁄₂                     60
Lemon                            Juice of ¹⁄₄             4
Chipped beef                     3 slices                50
Cream                            ¹⁄₂ cup                230
Toast                            1 large                100
                                                       ----
                                                        444


III. BREAKFAST.

(Summer.)

Banana, apple and lettuce salad with French or mayonnaise dressing.
Stale black bread.

Apple                             1 large             100
Lettuce                           ¹⁄₄ head             10
Banana                            1                   100
Oil                               2 tablesps.         200
Lemon                             Juice of ¹⁄₄          4
Black Bread                       1 slice             100
                                                     ----
                                                      514


DINNER.

Cream of wheat porridge with hot cream. Almonds and raisins.

Cream of wheat (raw)              ¹⁄₃ cup             250
Cream                             3 ounces            273
Almonds                           12 large            120
Raisins                           12 large            100
                                                     ----
                                                      743


SUPPER.

Strawberries with a large glass of raw mixed milk and cream and
zwieback.

Strawberries                      2 cups              120
Zwieback                          2                   100
Cream                             4 ounces            230
Milk                              8 ounces            165
                                                     ----
                                                      615


IV. BREAKFAST.

(Summer or Winter.)

Steel cut oats or wheat with butter or hot cream. Two large carrots or
cucumbers.

Oats (measured raw)                ¹⁄₃ cup              100
Butter                             1 tablesp.           105
Carrots                            2 large              100
                                                       ----
                                                        305


LUNCH OR DINNER.

Sandwiches with butter and sliced American cheese or one-half blood or
liver sausage and two apples.

Black or whole wheat bread         2 large slices       200
Butter                             3 tablesps.          315
Cheese                             ¹⁄₄ lb.              450
Apples                             2 large              100
                                                       ----
                                                       1065


SUPPER.

Green pea soup with fried bread and stewed prunes.

Peas (measured before soaking)     ¹⁄₂ cup               80
Onion                              1                      6
Bread                              2 small slices        75
Fat for cooking and frying         4 tablesps.          400
Flour for cooking and frying       2 tablesps.           60
Prunes                             6                    120
                                                       ----
                                                        741


V. BREAKFAST.

(Summer or Winter.)

Banana salad with lettuce and French dressing, grapenuts or ryenuts.

Banana                         2 medium              200
Lettuce                        ¹⁄₄ head               10
Olive Oil                      2 tablesps.           200
Lemon                          Juice of ¹⁄₂            8
Grapenuts                      1 tablesp.             30
                                                    ----
                                                     448


DINNER.

Strained barley soup with prunes, beefsteak, sprouts and butter sauce,
toast and black coffee.

Barley (before soaking)        ¹⁄₃ cup               450
Prunes                         5                     100
Butter                         1 teasp.              105
Beefsteak                      ¹⁄₄ lb.               160
Sprouts                        ³⁄₄ cup                30
Butter Sauce                   ¹⁄₂ cup               135
Toast                          1 large slice         100
Butter                         1 teasp.               35
                                                    ----
                                                    1115


SUPPER.

Baked apple with cream, puffed wheat or corn flakes mixed with pieces
of butter, two soft boiled eggs, one-half cup of black coffee.

Apple                          1 large               100
Cream                          ¹⁄₄ cup               115
Puffed wheat                   ³⁄₄ cup                75
Butter                         1 tablesp.            105
Eggs                           2                     120
                                                    ----
                                                     515




FOOD FOR THE AGED


Many people at the ages of sixty and seventy still lead an active
life, while others retire from activity at forty-five or fifty.
Therefore, the food must conform to the person’s mental and physical
requirements. If the teeth are poor and the digestive powers are weak,
the food should be light, consisting mainly of well cooked cereals,
baked potatoes, rice, cooked greens, a small amount of meat, raw
fruits and raw greens in combination with fatty foods, as salads, milk
and buttermilk, toasted breads and soups. The total fuel requirement
depends upon whether the individual leads a quiet or active existence.
For a person who lives mainly indoors, and makes little use of the
muscles of the arms, shoulders and trunk, 1000 to 1200 calories is
sufficient for twenty-four hours. If more food is eaten than the body
requires, the excess will manifest itself by the development of chronic
ailments and obesity, or feeble-mindedness.

The morning and evening meals should consist of fluid and semi-fluid
foods, or of toasted breads and salads. Meats, eggs (except the yolks),
cheese, beans, peas and nuts should be eaten only during the middle
of the day in small quantities. One can cut down his amount of food
greatly by thoroughly chewing each morsel. The demand for protein at
this period is small, while the amount of fat should be increased. A
few sample bills of fare may be of assistance to those who wish to make
a study of food requirements for themselves or for others.


MENUS FOR THE AGED


I. BREAKFAST.

Apple salad with lettuce finely chopped, onion and mayonnaise dressing,
bacon and crusts.

                          Portion of food containing calories
Apple                             1 medium                 72
Lettuce                           ¹⁄₈ head                  5
Onion                             ¹⁄₄ piece
Oil                               4 tablesps.             100
Lemon or vinegar                  About 2 teasps.           4
Yolk of egg                       1                        48
Bacon                             2 ounces                325
Crusts                            2                        50
                                                         ----
                                                          604


DINNER.

Clear soup with rice and egg. One lamb chop with sprouts, and one
triscuit with butter.

Soup                              1 cup                   100
Rice (measured before soaking)    2 tablesps.             100
Yolk of Egg                       1                        48
Lamb chop                         1 small                 100
Sprouts                           ¹⁄₂ cup                  20
Butter sauce                      ¹⁄₂ cup                 135
Triscuit                          1                        35
Butter                            1 teasp.                 35
                                                         ----
                                                          573


SUPPER.

One large glass of buttermilk, kumyss, peptonized hot milk or Dr.
Metchinikoff’s sour milk, with one slice of graham toast.

Milk                              12 ounces               247
Graham toast                      1 large slice           100
                                                         ----
                                                          347


II. BREAKFAST.

Raw cranberries and celery with olive oil, one slice of graham or whole
wheat toast with butter and unsweetened black malt coffee.

Cranberries                   ¹⁄₄ cup                    10
Olive oil                     2 tablesps.               100
Toast                         1 large slice             100
Butter                        1 tablesp.                105
Raw Celery                    2 stalks                   16
                                                       ----
                                                        331


DINNER.

Rice with cream or tomato sauce, eight almonds or one large zwieback
with one level tablespoonful of almond butter and raisins.

Rice                          3 tablesps.               150
Hot cream                     2 ounces                  115
Almonds                       8                          80
Raisins (large)               8                          80
                                                       ----
                                                        425


SUPPER.

Calves’-foot and tomato jelly with graham toast or puffed wheat and
milk or black malt coffee.

Jelly                         ¹⁄₂ cup                    50
Puffed Wheat                  1 cup                     100
Milk                          8 ounces                  165
                                                       ----
                                                        315


III. BREAKFAST.

Raspberries or strawberries, plain shredded wheat with cream.

Raspberries                    ¹⁄₂ cup              30
Shredded wheat                 1                   100
Cream                          2 ounces            115
                                                  ----
                                                   245


DINNER.

Potato or apple salad, and lettuce with mayonnaise dressing, fish,
black crusts and black coffee.

Potatoes                       2 medium            150
Oil                            4 tablesps.         400
Yolk of egg                    1                    48
Lemon or vinegar               About 1 tablesp.      5
Raw onion (finely chopped)     ¹⁄₂ piece             3
Crusts                         3                    75
                                                  ----
                                                   681


SUPPER.

Cook’s flaked rice gruel with hot cream, cream toast or vegetable cream
soup.

Flaked rice                    1 cup               100
Hot cream                      2 ounces            115
Hot water                      1 cup
                                                  ----
                                                   215


IV. BREAKFAST.

Cooked string beans with butter sauce and parsley, fried bacon and
triscuit with butter.

String beans (cut up)         ¹⁄₂ cup                 20
Butter sauce                  ¹⁄₂ cup                135
Fried bacon                   2 ounces               200
Triscuit                      1                       35
Butter                        1 teasp.                35
                                                    ----
                                                     425


DINNER.

Barley soup with crackers, pea puree on toast, stewed prunes with cream.

Barley                        3 tablesps.            270
Butter                        1 teasp.                35
Cracker                       1                       25
Pea puree                     2 tablesps.            100
Toast                         1 large                100
Prunes                        5                      100
Cream                         2 ounces               115
                                                    ----
                                                     745


SUPPER.

Bran tea with cream. A piece of cake or a slice of light egg toast.

Bran                          ¹⁄₂ cup                110
Cream                         1 ounce                 58
Egg                           1                       60
Soupstock                     ¹⁄₄ cup                 25
Butter for frying             1 tablesp.             105
                                                    ----
                                                     358




                              CHAPTER II.

                        DIET DURING PREGNANCY.


A healthy woman will be guided by intuition as to the selection of food
suited to her condition. Unfortunately, only a few women are properly
matured in these days of forced education and unnatural occupations for
young girls during the age of puberty.

The craving of pregnant women for pickles, spices and certain fruits
out of season indicates an anemic condition. The individual longs
for an article, of which her mind is most conscious, to bring about
satisfaction.

Pregnant women require a larger amount of phosphates, lime and other
minerals in their food, especially during the first four months.
The amount of food taken should be rather less in quantity; and the
starches and sweets should be cut down as much as possible, unless the
mother has to perform a large amount of physical work.

Vomiting during the early months of pregnancy is generally due to
excess of starches and indigestible foodstuffs. The eliminating organs
not being able to throw off the excess of waste, the system rids itself
of it through the effort of the liver, before the waste enters the
blood stream.

A suitable diet depends much upon the constitution of the mother. In
severe cases of vomiting or headache, a diet should be prescribed by a
physician.


DIET FOR THE MOTHER AFTER LABOR.

This is another important period for the welfare of the mother as well
as of the infant. Improper feeding during the first month after the
child is born is responsible for many nervous breakdowns of the mother,
at the time when she should be in the best of health and ready to take
charge of her infant. A healthy new born infant can stand an enormous
amount of abuse in the matter of feeding before it is sent to an early
grave, or before the foundation is laid for a life of long suffering.

The mother’s milk during the first month of the infant’s life is
richer in cream and sugar than in the later months. Therefore, such
foods should be given as yield these elements to the milk. The mother
herself, having expended a large amount of energy, demands a food rich
in lime, fats, sugar and organic salts. The physiological enlargement
of the abdominal organs must be treated with great care.

As a rule, no food is required during the first few hours except water.
In exceptional cases where the mother is greatly exhausted, a glass of
fresh milk or some warm stimulating food may be served.

The food during the first four days should consist largely of strained
water gruels, prepared from steel cut oats and bran, or from rolled
wheat or cream of wheat. Stewed prunes, toast, soft boiled eggs or
other egg foods should be served once per day at the noon meal. Fresh
milk is best given during the afternoon or evening or at 10 a. m. A
slice of toast may be served with it. If the milk of the mother is
scanty, serve water gruels several times per day. If the mother has too
much milk, fluid foods should be restricted and a dry diet adopted.
After the fourth day add rice, baked potatoes, fish and a small amount
of meat to the diet. Avoid drinking milk or other liquid food, except a
little water with the dinner. If milk or broth is desired, take it at
the beginning of the meal. Avoid artificially prepared desserts at the
end of the meal. Use oranges or grapes as desserts, or a little black
coffee and toast.


Suggestive Menus for Breakfast during the First Week.

 1. Three-fourths of a pint of barley gruel with or without cream, 2
 crusts.

 2. Eight ounces of cornmeal mush with egg and dried fruit. 4 ounces of
 hot cream. 2 crusts.

 3. Stewed or soaked French prunes with whole wheat bread and butter.
 10 ounces of bran tea or Kneipp’s malt coffee with cream and
 milk-sugar.

 4. One pint of bran and oatmeal gruel with butter, soaked French
 prunes, 2 black crusts.

 5. Eight ounces of fresh raw or boiled milk with 3 ounces of barley
 water and a slice of toast.

 6. Rice flour with egg and currants and hot cream and 2 crusts.

 7. Rylax with hot cream, soaked prunes or raisins.

 8. Bread soup with hot cream, soaked prunes or raisins.

 9. Rice with hot cream and soaked prunes or raisins.

 10. Malt coffee with toast and butter. Soft boiled eggs.


Menus for Dinner during the First Week.

 1. Cream toast, light rice, or cornmeal with egg.

 2. Soup of asparagus or green peas with toast.

 3. Soft boiled eggs with toast, baked apple.

 4. Cream of bean or lentil soup, bread and butter.

 5. Broth with egg. Fish with baked potatoes, apple sauce with toast
 and butter.

 6. Spinach with boiled eggs and bacon. Bread and butter.

 7. Barley soup with crackers. Lamb chop with sprouts and yolk of one
 egg.

 8. Chicken soup with rice. Chicken with string beans, stewed prunes.


Menus for Supper during the First Week.

 1. Strained barley or oatmeal gruel with cream.

 2. Cream of wheat or farina with cream.

 3. Sago or tapioca with cream and zwieback.

 4. Malt coffee or bran tea with cream and zwieback.

 5. Boiled custard with fruit sauce and zwieback.

 6. Cream of pea or lentil soup with celery.

 7. Cream toast or shredded wheat with cream.

 8. Cream of tomato soup with zwieback and celery.

If food is required between meals, give plain milk, bran tea, or malt
coffee with cream and zwieback.




                             CHAPTER III.

                     CARE AND FEEDING OF CHILDREN.


THE NURSERY.

The nursery should be well lighted and ventilated, and if possible be
located on the southeast side of the house. The windows should be broad
and not too low. The wall-paper should be a cheerful green or blue with
designs of lighter shades, and the rug of brown or tan color. Avoid all
bric-a-brac, useless curtains, and other hangings which tend to darken
the room, gather dust and absorb odors. The furniture should be adapted
to the size and needs of the child. During the first four years the
meals are best served in the nursery, or at a time when the parents are
not at the table. It avoids much unnecessary excitement and temptation,
and if the child is under the constant care of the mother it will give
her relief during these hours. All children between the ages of four
and ten should have their evening meals served alone, or else be so
well trained as not to expect to eat the same food as the adults.


PREPARATION OF FOOD FOR INFANTS.


MILK.

In preparing modified milk or other fluid foods for infants, where
top milk is used, it is very important that the milk contain the same
amount of cream for each feeding, or else digestive disturbance and
irregularity of bowel movements will occur.

If milk, fresh from the cow and run through the cooler, is put into
bottles or jars and kept at the same temperature, the same percentage
of top-milk will be obtained daily. Five hours is generally sufficient
to obtain the desired quality. The best means of removing it is by a
spoon or siphon.

If raw milk is used without being sterilized, the desired amount for
each meal should be put into sterile bottles directly after delivery
and lightly covered by cheese-cloth or cotton and kept on ice or other
cold place. In this way each bottle will contain the same amount of
cream.


PREPARATION OF MODIFIED MILK (RAW).

Put the desired amount of top-milk into as many bottles as are required
for feeding during twelve hours. Prepare a solution of water and
milk-sugar by dissolving the sugar with the desired amount of boiling
water. Let cool and keep on ice for twenty-four hours. At each feeding,
add the prescribed amount of water to the milk, shake and heat in a
water bath. Add a tablespoonful of lime water or barley water. If the
milk cannot be obtained fresh twice per day, it is safer to scald the
milk which is used during the night.

All milk, even if handled carefully, contains a large number of germs.
When one is not certain that the cows from which the milk is obtained
are healthy, the milk should be sterilized. During the summer it is
safer to scald or sterilize all milk for infants.


SCALDED MILK (MODIFIED).

Dissolve the desired amount of milk sugar in boiling water in a clean
saucepan, add the milk, stir over a quick fire until it foams, which
means that the milk is heated to about 200° F. The most harmful germs
are generally destroyed by this process. Pour the milk into a clean
pitcher and set the latter in a pan of cold water. Stir the milk
until cold and change the water several times. The stirring makes the
milk homogeneous and easier to digest. If any scum has formed on top,
through careless preparation, the milk should be strained through a
cheese-cloth before putting it into bottles. Put a cotton stopper in
the bottles and set on ice. Milk prepared in this manner is generally
suitable for the average healthy infant.


STERILIZED MILK (MODIFIED).

Dissolve the milk sugar as directed for scalding milk. Add the desired
amount of milk, top-milk or cream, and prepare as directed in the
chapter under “Sterilized Milk.”


PASTEURIZED MILK.

Put the desired amount of milk or milk and cream mixture into sterile
bottles, put on a stopper and set in a water bath; heat the water to
155° or 170° F., and keep it at that temperature for 30 minutes. Then
remove the bottles at once, cool them in a pan of cold water and set on
ice.


BOILED MILK.

Put the desired amount of milk, or modified milk, into a clean
saucepan, stir over a hot fire and boil from 2 to 5 minutes. Then cool
by setting the pitcher into a pan of cold water; stir until cold and
set on ice. This is excellent for infants as well as for the sick who
suffer with diarrhœa. The milk may be modified with arrow-root, barley
water or rice flour gruel, which has been boiled with salt and water
and a stick of cinnamon. Milk-sugar should be boiled with the gruels,
two level tablespoonsful to a pint of boiling water.


ESKAY’S FOOD.

Prepare as directed on label or use like the foregoing in place of
arrow-root.


DR. BIEDERT’S MILK AND CREAM MIXTURES.

 1st month--4 ounces of cream, no milk, 12 ounces of water, 3
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.

 2nd month--4 ounces of cream, 2 ounces of milk, 12 ounces of water, 3
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.

 3rd month--4 ounces of cream, 4 ounces of milk, 12 ounces of water, 3
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.

 4th month--4 ounces of cream, 8 ounces of milk, 12 ounces of water, 3
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.

 5th month--4 ounces of cream, 12 ounces of milk, 12 ounces of water, 3
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.

 6th month--no cream, 16 ounces of milk, 8 ounces of water, 2
 tablespoonsful of milk-sugar.


DIRECTION FOR PREPARATION.

Put the desired amount into a saucepan and scald, as directed under
“Scalding Milk,” or put into bottles and pasteurize or sterilize.

If the bowels of an infant are too loose, lessen the amount of cream,
and add more milk in place of it. If the child is constipated, add
more cream and use less milk. If it disagrees, add oatmeal, rice, rye,
barley or legume water. For preparation, see “Teas,” in Chapter on
Fluids. Use one-half the amount of water, as directed above, add the
other half in the form of tea. Prepare the tea separately, and add
the desired amount to each bottle when heating. Camomile tea is often
beneficial for a few days. It can be added in the same manner as other
teas, or given without sugar or cream, when colic appears. The latter
way is preferable to too much hot water, when the infant is suffering
with colic.


ORIGINAL RECIPE FOR DELICATE INFANTS.

=Mixture of Cream, Milk, Water, Milk-Sugar, Rice Flour and Pearl
Barley--(Condensed Milk, if Required).=

Dissolve two tablespoonsful of rice flour in a little cold water, stir
into twelve ounces of boiling water, add one-fourth of a teaspoonful of
salt, and boil for 20 minutes. Pour into a pitcher and keep on ice for
24 hours. Use.

Soak one-fourth of a cup of pearl barley for several hours, or over
night. Boil with a quart of water and a little salt for one and
one-half hours. This will make about ten ounces of barley water when
strained. Keep the barley water and rice flour gruel in separate
pitchers. If an additional amount of condensed milk is found more
agreeable, add one tablespoonful of Eagle Brand Condensed Milk to the
barley water in place of milk-sugar, before straining it.

Prepare the milk as follows: Dissolve two tablespoonsful of milk-sugar
in ten ounces of boiling water, add four ounces of cream and four of
milk, stir the milk and water in a saucepan over a quick fire until
it foams, and pour into eight clean warm bottles which have been set
in a kettle of hot water. Put cotton stoppers in the bottles, and
pour enough water into the kettle so that it is even with the milk
in the bottles. Let it stand on a hot stove and keep the water at the
temperature of 170° to 200° F. for half an hour. Then set the kettle on
the floor and when the water is cold, remove the bottles and put them
on ice. At each feeding, add one ounce of the prepared barley water,
and a tablespoonful of rice flour gruel to the bottle; shake well,
and heat by setting the bottle in warm water. This will make about
28 ounces of food for 24 hours, or 3¹⁄₂ ounces per bottle for eight
feedings during 24 hours. This quantity is required for the average
child during the second month. Ten feedings are generally required
during the first month.

During the first week of the infant’s life use 5 ounces of cream, 5
ounces of water, 8 ounces of rice and barley water, and no milk. This
makes 18 ounces of food for 24 hours, or about 2¹⁄₂ ounces per bottle
for ten feedings during 24 hours. If a larger quantity is desired
during the first month, add 2¹⁄₂ ounces of water and 2 ounces of milk
to the cream mixture, then gradually change to the proportion given
in above formulas. As the child grows older, increase the amount of
milk to 12 or 15 ounces until the age of ten months. After that age 42
ounces of food is required during 24 hours, and the child is generally
able to begin with semi-liquid or solid food. The rice flour alone,
or any other cereal gruel or water may be used in place of barley
and rice, but the latter is found especially beneficial for delicate
infants with whom plain modified milk disagrees.

It is often desirable to change the cereal occasionally. Use oats, rye
and barley during the winter and the lighter cereals during the summer.
Other suitable foods for the infant are bran or rye tea with or without
milk or cream, and broths from veal or mutton with the yolk of an egg
(10 ounces of broth to one yolk). Strained steel cut oats and bran are
excellent for a while where milk or cream are found to disagree.

During the period from the tenth to the fifteenth month the healthy
infant requires an addition of solid food. The appearance of the teeth
indicate when it should begin. The change must be made gradually from
liquid to semi-liquid and finally to solid food. The middle of the
day is the best time to begin with the change of food. Lean meat is
not a necessary food for children, therefore it is mentioned only
occasionally for those who think their children must have it. On, the
other hand, legumes are a very important food for young children, and
their use should begin during the second year. They are easily digested
if prepared in the form of soups and purees, and combined as directed
in the different menus. They should not be given at night.


SECOND PERIOD: FROM THE TENTH TO THE FIFTEENTH MONTH.

During this period the infant should sleep three times during the day:
From 8 to 10 a. m., from 1 to 3 p. m., and from 6 to 8 p. m. If the
child should not awaken for the last feeding and sleep until 4 or 5 a.
m., give the feeding at 4 a. m. instead of between 8 and 10 p. m. If
it should be in the habit of awakening during the middle of the night,
change the habit by awakening it at 10 p. m. Reduce the quantity of
milk given at this time gradually to 3 or 4 ounces, and finally replace
it by water.

If the child should sleep from 6 p. m. to 6 a. m. without awakening, it
does not require the extra feeding; four meals are sufficient.

Some children require five meals until they are two years old. With
intelligent study and simple regularity the mother can make her work
very easy. She can transform delicate children into strong, vigorous
ones, avoid disease and many unnecessary doctor bills.

Do not begin the habit of stuffing the child with bread and crackers
every time it cries. If it desires something to bite upon give it
a teething-ring. Give the child as many meals as it requires, but
avoid feeding between meals. Give it cold or slightly warmed water
between meals. Do not force the child to drink water. If fed correctly
it will call for the necessary amount of water. If a child is too
heavy in weight for its age, reduce the amount of milk. Give it
strained oatmeal, bran and barley gruels, with butter or cream. Some
children require three pints of milk during 24 hours, between the
tenth and fifteenth months, while others are satisfied with one and
one-half pints of milk and four to six ounces of cream. If broths
or other nutritious liquids are substituted for milk, the amount of
milk required for the day would be less than that mentioned above.
Never force the child to eat food; when it awakens in the morning it
generally requires food immediately. When it awakens for its dinner,
let it play for a while until it calls for food. If it refuses food,
leave out a meal once in a while, or reduce the number of meals to suit
the appetite.


MENUS FOR THE SECOND PERIOD: FROM THE TENTH TO THE FIFTEENTH MONTH.


I.

 Between 6 and 8 a. m.--Plain or diluted milk.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Flaked rice gruel with sterilized cream.

 Between 2 and 3 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or diluted milk.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--One cup of broth with egg, one-half slice of
 toast with butter.

 Between 8 and 10 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or diluted milk.


II.

 Between 6 and 8 a. m.--Gruel of steel cut oats with one-half part of
 sterilized cream.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Bread gruel with butter or cream.

 Between 2 and 3 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or diluted milk.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Sago gruel with zwieback and butter (prepared
 with unfermented beer).

 Between 8 and 10 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or diluted milk.


III.

 Between 6 and 8 a. m.--Strained barley gruel with sterilized milk.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Prune toast with beachnut bacon. Between 2
 and 3 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Sago gruel with cream and crackers or zwieback.

 Between 8 and 10 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.


ADDITIONAL MENUS SUITABLE BETWEEN 10 AND 12 A. M.

1. Cream toast. 2. Barley and bread gruel. 3. Bran and oatmeal gruel.
4. Cream of tomato soup with crackers. 5. Toast with creamed chipped
beef. 6. Baked oats with prune jam and beachnut bacon. 7. Baked
cornmeal with egg and cranberry sauce. 8. Light egg toast. 9. Soft
boiled egg and toast.


MENUS FOR THE THIRD PERIOD: FROM THE FIFTEENTH TO THE TWENTY-FOURTH
MONTH.


I.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Strained steel cut oats with sterilized cream.

 Between 11 and 12 a. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or diluted milk.

 Between 1:30 and 2:3O p. m.--Light rice with sterilized cream and
 crackers.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--A cup of unfermented beer and toast with butter.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of plain or sterilized
 milk.


II.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Cream of wheat with sterilized cream.

 Between 11 and 12 a. m.--Broth with egg, and toast with butter.

 Between 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Juice of one-half an orange, black bread
 pudding, celery.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--A cup of plain milk and two graham crackers.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of milk, plain or diluted,
 with rice or barley water.


III.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Cornmeal mush with cream.

 Between 11 and 12 a. m.--A cup of unfermented beer with zwieback and
 butter.

 Between 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Three to five strawberries, one to one
 and one-half egg with toast and cereal.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--A cup of plain milk with zwieback and calves’
 foot jelly.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Ten to twelve ounces of milk.


IV.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Bread soup with cream or butter.

 Between 11 and 12 a. m.--Plain milk with unsweetened graham crackers.

 Between 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Strained bean soup with buttered toast.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--A cup of milk with crackers, or cream of tomato
 soup.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk per bottle.


V.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Rylax with sterilized cream.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Plain milk and crackers.

 Between 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--One-third to one-half cup of raspberries,
 eggs with toast and butter.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Plain milk and crackers.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.


VI.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Turoena with cream and black crusts.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Plain milk and crackers.

 Between 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Pea puree on toast, celery.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Plain milk and crackers, or tomato soup with
 cream.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.


VII.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Black cream toast or shredded wheat with
 cream. Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Plain milk or broth and crackers.

 Bet’n 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Light rice pudding, three ounces of
 strained tomato juice.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Unfermented beer, stale bread and butter.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.


VIII.

 Between 7 and 8 a. m.--Rice with sterilized cream or butter and egg.

 Between 10 and 12 a. m.--Plain milk with crackers.

 Bet’n 1:30 and 2:30 p. m.--Two leaves of lettuce, one carrot, one
 tablespoon of bean puree on toast.

 Between 5 and 6 p. m.--Cream of tomato soup with zwieback.

 Between 8 and 9 p. m.--Plain or diluted milk.


ADDITIONAL MENUS FOR DINNER DURING OR AFTER THE THIRD PERIOD:

 1. One-half orange, one or two ounces of boiled fish, one-half of an
 apple, one to two tablespoons of raw rylax.

 2. One-half of an apple, one or two eggs, one to two tablespoons of
 raw rylax.

 3. Cereal salad with carrots and fish.

 4. Legume soup, butter and bread, raw carrots.

 5. Well boiled macaroni, one to two tablespoons of cold grated cheese.

 6. Light rice with cold grated Swiss cheese.

 7. Cereal salad with apple and eggs.

 8. Lettuce, baked potatoes, beachnut bacon and one egg.

 9. Mashed carrots, two tablespoons of young green peas, bacon, toast
 with butter.

 10. String beans with stale bread and butter, bacon and egg.

 11. Finely chopped spinach, bacon, egg, stale bread, butter.

 12. Three to five cherries, light omelet.

 13. Cereal salad with chopped apples, two to three tablespoons of
 cottage cheese.

 14. Baked oats with prunes or cranberry sauce and bacon.

 15. Whole wheat with sterilized cream and celery.

 16. Peach and cereal salad, beachnut bacon and one egg.


ADDITIONAL MENUS FOR SUPPER DURING OR AFTER THE THIRD PERIOD.

 1. Rice with egg and clear soup.

 2. Gruels prepared with milk, cream, bran, bread, egg or soup stock.

 3. Plain milk with stale bread or zwieback.

 4. Huckleberry or cherry soup with whites of egg, and zwieback with
 butter.

 5. Cream of tomato or thin pea soup with celery or zwieback.

 6. Vegetable soups of asparagus or of strained canned corn.

 7. Rice flour with egg, currants and cream.

 8. Chocolate cornstarch with cream and black crusts.

 9. Apple-sago or cornstarch with egg and cream, and zwieback.

 10. Calves’ foot jelly with tomato, zwieback with milk.

 11. Cook’s flaked rice gruel with cream and cracker.

 12. Boiled custard with fruit sauce and black crusts.

 13. Potato soup with cream and black crusts.

 14. Clam broth with cream and zwieback, or with Grant’s crackers.

 15. Melon with lemon, finely chopped chipped beef on toast.

 16. Poached eggs on toast.

 17. Fruit or vegetable soups with cream or egg.

 18. Milk soups or milk gruels with black crusts.

 19. Beer soups with egg or cream and zwieback.

 20. Fruit toast with rich milk.

 21. Broth with egg triscuit or zwieback with butter.

 22. Red fruit pudding with cream and zwieback.

 23. Baked apples in gelatine with cream and zwieback, or with Grant’s
 crackers.

 24. Thin legume soups with cream or butter.

Some children are able to digest all the above mentioned foods before
they are three years old; others are not. Certain foods are agreeable
to certain temperaments and disagreeable to others. No exact rules
can be laid down. Reason and judgment must guide the mother in the
selection of foods as well as in other details.


GENERAL SUGGESTIONS.

Unleavened crackers, raw cereal flakes and stale sundried pompernickle
or whole wheat bread are the best dry cereal foods for children. If
cooked cereals are served, crackers and wheat bread are not necessary
at the same meal. A few black crusts or raw vegetables combine better
with cooked cereals.

Soda crackers or thoroughly toasted unsweetened zwieback may be given
occasionally for the evening meal in combination with sago, fruit
gruels or jellies.

Do not feed a child fresh breads and cakes which contain soda, yeast or
baking powder.

A child over three years of age may eat occasionally unleavened fruit
cake, pancakes and fruit tarts which are prepared with eggs.

Never allow a child to eat ice-cream at the end of a heavy meal. Serve
it at the beginning of the meal or during the afternoon.

Four meals per day is generally the best plan for a child, as long as
it sleeps during the day-time. If it is fed on plain, non-stimulating
food it generally takes a nap up to the age of 4 or 5 years, and
sometimes later, while a child that is fed upon meats, beef juices,
meat soups and excess of starch and sweets often refuses to sleep
during the day-time at the age of two.

Meats and sweets or excess of any kind of food irritate the sensitive
nerves and produce restlessness and sleeplessness in the child, and
much unnecessary work and sleepless nights of the mother. Any normal
healthy child can be trained in the matter of eating, sleeping,
evacuation of the bowels and in other details like clock-work, if the
proper conditions are furnished.

At the end of the third year the child may begin to eat well baked
beans, peas or lentils several times per week during the winter. They
should be given at the noon meal, in combination with raw or finely
mashed carrots, or with a tomato salad and raw greens. No more than
two tablespoonsful should be given at one meal. Systematic training in
chewing is absolutely necessary for a good digestion. If legume foods
should cause gas on the stomach, they must be strained and given in
the form of soups or purees. Walnuts may also be used. Give two or
three at the end of the meal. For combination, see “Menus for Adults.”
The amount of food should be increased gradually. At the age of 12 or
14, a child may eat nearly as much as an adult.

Moving picture shows, car and automobile rides require more nervous
energy than strolling in the woods. Instead of supplying the system
with plain nutritious foods, such as milk, nut preparations or
wholesome sandwiches on such occasions, the excitable nerves are
generally more stimulated by artificial foods: candies, cookies, sweet
graham crackers, gums or by exhilarating (pure fruit?) lemonade or germ
laden ice-cream.

Artificial lights and amusements of this kind, associated with nerve
starvation, cause much eye trouble in children. Think of the amount of
nervous and muscular energy expended during those hours in comparison
with walks or other kind of natural amusements!

If the chewing of gum, candies and other fancies is permissible in
cars and theatres, why not wholesome foods? A small satchel will hold
an aluminum can with milk, a few napkins and other wholesome food
products. If confectionery and ice-cream parlors and cheap restaurants
were supplanted by hygienic food laboratories and pure water stands,
saloons would soon be on the decrease.


WRONG MANAGEMENT.

The dyspeptic business men and women who have no time or power to
digest a meal during the middle of the day are generally the victims of
early habits acquired when at school.

We cannot try to change the fixed and immovable laws of nature without
paying the penalty. Nature will keep us in order and control our
machine, if we fulfill her laws. The sun is in sympathy with our
digestive forces; therefore we should rest from labor during the middle
of the day, so that the muscles of the stomach may be able to give all
the circular movements, and others that are necessary, to thoroughly
mix the food with the stomach juices for rapid digestion. Solid foods
of the protein class, can only undergo perfect digestion if eaten
in the middle of the day. They require many hours to digest, and in
this way they are ready for oxidation and assimilation at night, when
the air is cool. The body can rest, and the lungs and heart can work
better when the stomach is emptied. While on the other hand, if the
heaviest meal is taken at night, it is either too rapidly digested by
physical force, or it is left half digested in the stomach over night.
It congests the liver and kidneys, produces fermentation, robs lungs,
heart and skin of their nerve force, and creates an abnormal appetite
the next morning for an excess of energy-giving food, or it produces
a languid feeling and loss of appetite. Such a system of living is
responsible for the large number of acute and chronic diseases and
consumption, while those who seemingly keep in good health under such
conditions do surely shorten their life.

Perfect health and comfort are worth more than earthly possessions, and
those who strive earnestly to possess and retain health will find a
way to change their system of living. There is strength in union, and
if a sufficient number of sensible people demanded different hours for
school-children and for people who work indoors, it would be possible
to obtain them.

During hot summer days or in the tropics the noon hour is not always
the best for the heaviest meal of the day, but neither should it be
spent for work. Two meals per day is the best plan on hot days. An
individual who is always keyed up to the highest point during the
middle of the day, and expends the best of his energy for work, cannot
expect anything else but bankruptcy.

For people who desire two meals per day, the best time for breakfast is
between nine and ten in the morning, and for dinner between three and
four in the afternoon.

If three meals are taken, hard muscular workers, or those who are
employed out of doors, do well to substitute for their dinner a
substantial cold or warm lunch. If through lack of time and convenience
a child cannot have its dinner before 4 p. m., it is better off
without it. Remember that a cooked dinner consisting of meat, potatoes
and vegetables is not at all necessary for the child’s welfare and
development, and cooked vegetables should never be forced upon it
if it prefers to eat them raw. Healthy children have keen instinct,
and unless their appetite has become perverted by sweets and other
artificial, unnatural foods, they are more likely to select the right
kind of food than the average adult.

This book gives a large number of menus, consisting of raw foods, which
can be quickly prepared when the child comes home from school. Nuts,
fruits and raw vegetables form an ideal diet for the summer. Baked
beans, peas and lentils warmed over, or jellied fish, egg foods, cheese
or steamed puddings in combination with a warm soup or raw apples form
a perfect meal during cold, winter days. If the dinner is eaten between
the hours of 3:30 p. m. and 4:00 p. m., no more food is necessary. If
it is served at noon, give milk or soup between 5 and 6 p. m. Children
should take at least one-half an hour’s rest before eating, when coming
home from school. The better way would be to allow children two hours
for their noon meal or curtail the hours of school work from 9 a. m. to
1 or 2 p. m. Such is the custom in many European countries, and there
is no reason why it could not be practiced here.

Children between the ages of eight and fourteen should retire between
7 and 8 p. m. If they get sufficient sleep and are properly fed,
children’s diseases need not be feared.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                     LIGHT LUNCHES AND SANDWICHES.


LIGHT LUNCHES.

Menus for children, students at college and men and women who have
to toil indoors. They can be had in almost any good cafeteria, or be
prepared quickly on a gas or alcohol stove:

 1. Corn and tomato soup with black crusts.

 2. Cream of tomato soup with zwieback.

 3. Green pea soup with zwieback and celery.

 4. Broth with egg. Sandwiches with bologna or cold meat.

 5. Buttermilk with graham toast.

 6. Fresh milk with tomato toast.

 7. Fruit gruel with white of eggs, and bread or toast with butter.

 8. Strained canned tomato juice with whole wheat toast and butter.

 9. Orange juice, green leaf vegetable with fried bacon and soft boiled
 eggs.

 10. Pineapple salad with whipped cream and toast.

 11. Apple or banana salad with lettuce and French or mayonnaise
 dressing, orange juice.

 12. Potato salad with lettuce and soft boiled eggs.

 13. Strawberries, raspberries or blackberries with rich fresh milk and
 zwieback or toast, butter and eggs.

 14. Cherries and egg food.

 15. Cream cheese with apples and sandwiches.

 16. Fig or date butter with ryenuts and rich fresh milk or sandwiches.

 17. Raw huckleberries (one-half to one cupful) with butter and stale
 bread.

 18. Lettuce with two or three bananas and one-half to one glass of
 strained cranberry juice.

 19. Apple salad with lettuce and almond cream or whole almonds.

 20. Apples, raisins and six to twelve nuts.

 21. Gelatine of fruit, or bread and bran with cream and toast.

 22. Clam broth or cream soup with toast and raw celery.

 23. Musk melon with lemon and berries.

 24. Baked apples in gelatine with fish salad.

 25. Ambrosia or apple sauce with whites of eggs and toast.


LUNCHES FOR THEATRES.

Cocoanut wafers, macaroons prepared with almond paste, Hershy’s
chocolate, white figs and rye nuts, sandwiches with fruit butter or
ground dried fruits and nuts.


AFTERNOON DRINKS AND DAINTIES.

Postum, weak tea, bran tea with cream, unfermented apple juice, fresh
apple cider.

FOODS--Fruit cakes, tarts, cream puffs, cream rolls, zwieback, Huntly
and Palmer biscuits, nabiscos, sandtarts, ice-creams, fruit gelatines.


SANDWICHES.

The sandwich is an important part of the bill of fare. It is not
necessary to eat a cooked dinner in order to have a square meal, but
for those who work indoors and are unable to take walking exercises
before or after their noon meal, it is important to take some warm
fluid or semi-fluid food in the form of broth, milk or soup as an
entree or with their meal. With the convenience of modern inventions of
gas, alcohol and electric stoves, or patented bottles which keep food
warm for hours, this is easily obtained.

An endless variety of nutritious lunches can be prepared from left-over
or fresh vegetables, meats, fish, eggs and cheese, or from raw cereals,
nuts, fruits and greens. The bread used for sandwiches should always be
stale or sun dried and be kept in a dry place in a tin box with good
ventilation.


MENUS FOR LUNCH OR SUBSTITUTES FOR DINNER.


Grated Cheese with Apples and Buttered Bread.

1. Grate two to four ounces of Swiss or American cheese and carry in a
glass jar or paper bag. At lunch-time peel one or two apples, cut them
up in small pieces and mix with grated cheese. Eat with buttered bread.


Meat Sandwiches with Olives and Mayonnaise Dressing.

2. Prepare a salad from left-over meat, mixing with olives and
dressing, or slice the meat and put between layers of bread, and mix
the olives with mayonnaise dressing.


Scrambled Eggs on Sandwiches, and Cherries.

3. Eat the cherries at the beginning or at the end of the meal; lettuce
is a good addition.


Ground Nuts with Apples and Raisins.

4. Grind six to twelve nuts in the morning and keep in a jar or paper
bag. At lunch-time cut one apple into small pieces, add twelve raisins
and the ground nuts. Eat with or without bread and butter. It is best
to use only one kind of nuts at a time. Celery is also a good addition.


Nut and Date Sandwiches.

5. Remove the stones from one-half dozen or more dates, cut the dates
into small pieces and mix with one-third or one-half the amount of
chopped or ground walnuts. Spread on buttered bread or eat the bread
with it. Apples combine well with it, either as a substitute for bread
or in combination with it. In place of whole nuts, nut-butter may be
used; the latter should always be diluted with an equal amount of water.

Figs, raisins or dried currants can be used in the same way as dates.
Lettuce and celery are good additions.


Tomatoes with Popcorn, Bread and Butter.

6. Prepare a salad with tomato and lettuce, or strain some canned
tomatoes. The latter can be carried conveniently in a small Mason jar.
Always open the jar a little, if left to stand in a store or office,
so the air can circulate through it. Take one cup of tomato juice in
combination with one-half pint or more of warm, buttered popcorn. Eat
bread and butter with it, if desired.


Egg Sandwiches with Watercress and Olives.

8. Slice some hard boiled eggs and lay on buttered bread. Mix some
olives and watercress with mayonnaise dressing, and serve with the
bread. Egg sandwiches combine well with sliced or potted ham, or with
anchovy or herring--butter, or with apples.


Cottage or Cream Cheese Sandwiches.

9. Spread thin slices of rye or black bread with cheese. Combine with
apples or olives, with or without lettuce and mayonnaise dressing.


Cabbage Salad with Bread, Butter and Bologna.

10. Prepare the salad in the morning, mix with mayonnaise dressing and
carry in a glass or jar. Prepare the bread with butter and thin slices
of bologna or ham. Eat the cabbage salad as an entree or with the
sandwiches. Hard boiled eggs are a good addition.


Potato Salad with Black Bread and Butter and Bologna.

11. Serve the salad as an entree. Prepare thin slices of pompernickle
with butter and bologna or ham, and combine with hard boiled eggs. Nuts
may be substituted for eggs.


Peanut and Olive Sandwiches.

12. Remove the stones and cut the olives into small pieces, mix with
diluted peanut butter, and season with lemon.

Spread on rye bread.


Egg Sandwiches with Ham or Chipped Beef.

13. Chop some ham or beef very fine. Prepare some eggs for scrambling,
mix with the meat and finish like scrambled eggs. When cold spread on
sandwiches.


Raw Beef Sandwiches.

14. Wash some freshly cut round-steak, dry and scrape. Spread on
buttered triscuit or soda cracker. Combine with lettuce and French
dressing. Serve at once.


Sandwiches with Sausage.

15. Spread thin slices of rye or black bread with butter. Cover with
liver sausage, blood sausage or metwurst. Goose fat or leaf lard can
be substituted for the butter or be omitted. Combine with tart apples.
Onions and lettuce is also a good addition.


Meat Sandwiches with Tomatoes and Cucumbers.

16. Cut some cold boiled or roasted lean meat into thin slices and lay
on buttered bread. Eat cucumbers with it.




                              CHAPTER V.

                     FOOD COMBINATIONS AND MENUS.


DO NOT MIX.

 Meat and Cheese.

 Cherries and Milk.

 Fancy Summer Fruits and Onions.

 Fancy Summer Fruits and Cucumber.

 Nuts and Excess of Starchy Food.

 Potatoes and Tomatoes.

 Potatoes and Tart Fruits.

 Potatoes and Fresh Yeast Bread.

 Potatoes and White Bread.

 Potatoes and Underground Vegetables.

 Cooked Greens and Raw Greens.

 Meat and Dates or Figs.

 Pork and Sago.

 Cucumber and Sago.

 Strawberries and Tomatoes.

 Strawberries and Beans.

 Bananas and Corn.

 Fat Pork and Cucumbers.

 Pork and Sweet Fruits.

 Pork and Fancy Fruits.

 Pork and Corn.

 Meat and Fish.

 Raw Fruits and Cooked Vegetables.

 Milk and Cooked Vegetables.

 Milk and Meat.

 Fresh Raw Fruits and Cooked Cereals.

 Cooked Vegetables and Nuts.

 Cheese and Nuts.

 Boiled Eggs and Nuts.

 Boiled Eggs and Canned Corn.

 Boiled Eggs and Bananas.

 Boiled Eggs and Fresh Pork.

 Boiled Eggs and Cheese.

 Bananas and Pork.

 Bananas and Cucumbers.

 Skim-milk and Fruit.

 Cheese and Bananas.

 Beans and Bananas.


GOOD COMBINATIONS.

 Raw Fruits and Raw Cereals.

 Raw Fruits and Raw Cereals and Nuts.

 Raw Fruits and Raw Greens and Nuts.

 Raw Cereals and Nuts.

 Raw Cereals and Raw Milk.

 Raw Cereals and Raw Vegetables.

 Boiled Cereals and Boiled Milk.

 Boiled Cereals and Boiled Cream.

 Raw Greens and Meats or Eggs.

 Boiled Greens and Meats or Eggs.

 Fats and Acids.

 Meats and Acids.

 Cheese and Apples.

 Cheese and Rye.

 Eggs and Salted Meat.

 Eggs and Acid Fruits.

 Eggs and Greens.

 Nuts and Apples.

 Nuts and Bananas.

 Almonds and Rice.

 Nuts and Raisins.

 Nuts and Dried Currants.

The harmony and disharmony between the different foods as mentioned
above are only stated in a general way. Certain combinations are
absolutely harmful to every individual, others are either harmful to
certain temperaments, or, to mix them would mean a waste in the animal
economy of the body.


REMARKS.

Use only one rich protein food at any meal.

Exceptions: A few nuts which are rich in fat may be eaten at the end of
a meal where lean meat is served.

Milk and milk soups may be taken at the beginning of a meal where meat
is served, but they should never be mixed with the meat dish or used at
the end of a meal where meat is served.




                              CHAPTER VI.


LAXATIVE FOODS.

Fruit juices, plums, tomatoes, apples, pears, grapes, figs,
fruit-soups, fruit-gruels, raisins, gelatines, corn, oats, spinach,
oranges, carrots, parsnips, bran, oil, butter, cream, olives, yolks of
eggs, pecans, walnuts, Brazil nuts, cucumbers, onions, greens.


CONSTIPATING FOODS.

Skim-milk, liquid foods, fine flour bread, potatoes, tapioca, white of
eggs, gluten, mush, lean meat and cheese made from skim-milk.


MENUS.

A menu which is one-sided or combined wrongly, that is, one in which
either protein, carbohydrates, minerals or fluids are provided in
excess, leads to waste of nervous energy as well as to waste of
nutritive material. A wrong combination creates an abnormal appetite
for too much or too little food.

Each person should learn by experience to select the kinds of food
which yield him nourishment and avoid those which disagree.


MENUS FOR BREAKFAST.

People who feel the need of laxative foods during the spring season
will find here a number of suitable breakfast menus to choose from:

 1. Cooked spinach or yellow dock or mustard greens or dandelion leaves
 with rye or wheat bread and butter. Eggs or bacon, if desired.

 2. Finely mashed boiled beets or turnips or potatoes or carrots or
 parsnips with plenty of parsley and bacon or ham or cornbeef or
 chipped dried beef.

 3. Rhubarb salad and lettuce with French or mayonnaise dressing.
 Cornmeal cakes or muffins.

 4. Mushroom salad with lettuce and French dressing. Bread and butter.

 5. Cooked cereal of rice or wheat or rye with hot cream or butter and
 cucumbers cut in halves.

 6. Sliced bananas and grapefruit with nut dressing or with mayonnaise
 dressing.

 7. Cabbage salad with mayonnaise dressing, hard boiled eggs and bread
 with butter.

 8. Strained canned tomato juice and bananas with lettuce.

 9. Fish cakes with steamed potatoes, parsley and butter. Black crusts.

 10. Baked or plain boiled cauliflower with cold boiled beef or chipped
 beef.

 11. Boiled cauliflower with tomato sauce and stale bread with butter
 and grated cheese.

 12. Tomato puree with fried parsnip balls, black toast with butter.

 13. Radishes, green onions, whole wheat bread and butter.

 14. Asparagus salad with ham hash, bread and butter.

 15. Cream of potato soup with black toast or raw carrots or celery.

 16. Salted mackerel with creamed potatoes, a glass of milk, celery.

 17. Apple salad with mayonnaise dressing, a slice of stale bread and a
 glass of milk.

 18. Lettuce with syrup dressing and German pancakes with bacon.

 19. French rolls with butter and boiled ham, black malt coffee.

 20. Warm apple pie with lettuce and cheese, black malt coffee.

 21. Apple salad, corn bread, creamed chipped beef.

 22. Shredded wheat with strawberries and milk or cream.

 23. Lettuce, baked potatoes, fish salad with mayonnaise dressing.

 24. Warmed-over macaroni with tomato puree and cold grated cheese.

 25. Macaroni with cream sauce and frankfurter.

 26. Codfish cakes with cream rice or apple rice or apple salad.

 27. Omelet with lettuce and stewed prunes or syrup dressing.

 28. Apple rice with bacon or eggs or fish croquettes, celery.

 29. Boiled onions with black bread and butter and bologna or
 frankfurter.

 30. Bread fritters with apple sauce or with lettuce and syrup dressing.

 31. Bacon with string beans, bread and butter, stewed prunes.

 32. Lettuce with mayonnaise dressing and baked potatoes with creamed
 beef.

 33. Celery with French dressing and fried sweet potatoes with
 cranberry sauce.

 34. Corned beef hash with eggs and triscuits with butter.

 35. Lettuce with syrup dressing and buckwheat cakes.

 36. Grated carrots with lettuce and unfired bread with butter or
 nut-cream.

 37. Turnip salad with lettuce and unfired bread with butter or
 nut-cream.

 38. Lettuce with French dressing and cornmeal patties with cranberry
 sauce.

 39. Lettuce with French dressing and mashed potatoes with buttermilk
 and bacon.

 40. Apple salad with lettuce and black bread with cheese.

 41. Pear salad with cranberries and celery. Unfired bread with butter
 or nut-cream.

 42. Lettuce with French dressing and baked potatoes and eggs.


WHAT SHALL WE DRINK WITH OUR MEALS?

This question is often asked. It depends entirely on the quality and
combination of food which is eaten.

A diet consisting of a variety of solids and vegetables with excessive
fluids gives the stomach nothing to do; the contents pass at once into
the intestines. Such mixtures are ingested instead of being digested;
they cannot be fully utilized because the stimuli upon the drainage of
the body is lacking.

If dry foods are eaten, such as sandwiches, rice, macaroni, potatoes
or dry cereals, without the addition of fruits, vegetables or soups, a
small amount of liquid should be taken. Such simple foods do not form a
perfect meal, therefore milk or broths are preferable to water. Water
is best taken from five to fifteen minutes before the meal or from one
to two hours after meals. Black malt coffee is sometimes beneficial if
one-half cupful is taken after or with meals. It acts like a tonic,
especially if the liver is sluggish.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                           MENUS FOR DINNER.


Select menus suitable for the season of the year. In the spring-time
use more of eggs, lamb, fish, green peas, spring chicken and egg-foods
in the form of pancakes, omelets and puddings. During the summer eat
very little meat. Use nuts, fish, eggs and milk foods. As the weather
gets colder use more protein foods and carbohydrates. During the winter
use a larger amount of dried legumes, nuts and meats, and more fatty
foods. Add fruits and vegetables which are in season.

 1. Apple salad with lettuce and broiled steak, shredded wheat with
 butter.

 2. Cream of pea soup. Beef or roast pork with potato dumplings, stewed
 prunes.

 3. Broiled chops with young peas and creamed potatoes. Oranges.

 4. Tomato salad with lettuce. Veal with mushrooms and rice. Toast and
 coffee.

 5. Cream of tomato soup. Veal chops with peas, stewed prunes.

 6. Broth with egg. Spinach, hard eggs, tongue. Grapes or oranges.

 7. Sweet potatoes with roast beef, tomato puree, celery. Black toast
 with coffee.

 8. Apple salad with watercress, fish with shredded wheat or bread and
 butter.

 9. Tomato jelly salad. Beef croquettes with tomato sauce and rice,
 celery.

 10. Cream of potato soup. Cold beef with stewed prunes, bread and
 butter.

 11. Bean soup. Cabbage or sprouts with mutton, bread and butter.

 12. Raw oysters with lemon and apple salad, whole wheat bread and
 butter, celery.

 13. Boiled veal or mutton with caper sauce and stuffed peppers, celery.

 14. Barley soup with cracker. Roast duck with apple stuffing. Grapes
 or oranges.

 15. Macaroni with grated cold cheese and lettuce salad.

 16. Rice with grated cold cheese and lettuce salad.

 17. Baked fish, boiled potatoes with parsley. Black toast with butter
 and coffee.

 18. Meat soup with bread and butter. Fish salad. Apples or oranges.

 19. Clam chowder. Omelet with lettuce and fruit sauce.

 20. Pea soup with fried bread. Roast goose with apple sauce.

 21. Baked potatoes with kidney stew. Black toast with butter.

 22. Potato salad with lettuce and fish, black crusts.

 23. Apple salad. Roast chicken with cranberry sauce. Steamed pudding
 with wine sauce.

 24. Rice or barley soup with crackers. Corned beef with cabbage and
 creamed potatoes.

 25. Tomato or apple salad with lettuce. Nuts.

 26. Rice with tomato sauce. Nuts.

 27. Rice with almond butter. Almonds.

 28. Banana salad with rye nuts and lettuce. Nuts.

 29. Pineapple salad with lettuce. Nuts.

 30. Beef or fruit soup. Macaroni with cream.

 31. Apple salad with lettuce, smoked eel with black bread.

 32. Corned beef, boiled eggs, potatoes and cabbage.

 33. Knorr’s pea soup with crackers. Stuffed peppers.

 34. Roast pork ribs with apple filling. Oranges, black bread with
 butter, coffee.

 35. Meat croquettes, beets, black bread and butter.

 36. Roast chicken with sprouts. Cranberry sauce. Steamed rice pudding.

 37. Green peas with dumplings and fried bacon, celery.

 38. Tripe with tomato sauce and sprouts, triscuit with butter.

 39. Apple salad with blood sausage, bread and butter.

 40. Tomato salad with lettuce and fish, bread and butter.

 41. Lamb stew with dumplings and green peas.

 42. Lettuce salad. Mashed carrots and baked beans with lemon.

 43. Pork with sauerkraut and dumplings.

 44. Raw carrots and lettuce salad. Pork and lentils.

 45. Beefsteak with eggs and potatoes, celery.

 46. Pea soup with crackers. Fish with apple salad, celery.

 47. Rice with frankfurters. Nuts.

 48. Sour roast with potato dumplings and lettuce salad. Stewed prunes.

 49. Broth with egg. Apple salad with onions and lettuce, pork chops.

 50. Pea soup with toast. Fish with apple rice. Black coffee and crusts.

 51. Apple salad with onions and lettuce, liver sausage, black bread.

 52. Milk soup. Plum pudding with brandy sauce, celery.

 53. Game or pork with sauerkraut and potato dumplings.

 54. Tongue with mushroom sauce and baked potatoes. Crusts and coffee.

 55. Apple salad with cottage cheese, olives, bread and butter.

 56. Boiled beef with string beans, steamed potatoes with white sauce.

 57. Baked oatmeal with cranberry sauce and celery.

 58. Carrot salad with lettuce. Lima beans with cold pork. Oranges.

 59. Fish with potato salad and black crusts. Grapes.

 60. Roast mutton with peas and baked potatoes, celery.

 61. Bean soup with raw carrots, bread and butter.

 62. Barley soup with soda crackers. Swiss cheese and apple salad.

 63. Lettuce salad with omelet and stewed prunes or cranberries.

 64. Tomato and lettuce salad with pork tenderloin. Oranges, bread and
 butter.

 65. Mashed carrots or beets with lemon, and fat or lean pork. Green
 grapes.

 66. Pea soup with fried bread. Calves’ liver with apple salad.

 67. Lentil soup with fried bread. Codfish balls with apple sauce.

 68. Rice and tomato soup. Boiled beef with horse-radish sauce and
 cabbage.

 69. Milk soup. Bologna, toast and butter.

 70. Salad of tomatoes or apple with mayonnaise dressing. Roasted
 chestnuts.

 71. Calves’ tongue with mushroom sauce and rice. Crackers with butter.

 72. Lettuce salad. Fried eggplant with lemon and beefsteak, string
 beans.

 73. Blue or white cabbage with cold or warm roast pork and baked
 potatoes or apples.

 74. Cabbage rolls with potatoes and white sauce. Bread pudding.

 75. Raw sweet corn and tomato salad with French dressing. Bread and
 butter.

 76. Chicken soup with rice. Roast chicken with stuffed apples and
 cranberry compote, celery.

 77. Green pea soup with fried bread. Breaded sour goose with potatoes
 and apple sauce.

 78. Bean soup with cream. Apple dumplings with lemon sauce.

 79. Celery and apple salad with mayonnaise dressing. Baked squash with
 lemon and beefsteak. Grapes.

 80. Boiled cabbage with egg dressing. Bread pudding with stewed prunes
 or fruit sauce.

 81. Apple and pineapple salad with whipped cream. Almonds and raisins.

 82. Apples and lettuce salad. Buckwheat pancakes with syrup dressing.
 Nuts.

 83. Corn bread, 3 to 6 ounces of canned strained tomato juice. Nuts.

 84. Cream of corn soup with black crusts. Nuts.

 85. Potato salad with cottage cheese and lettuce.

 86. Boiled or steamed bread pudding with tomato sauce or fruit sauce.

 87. Lentils with onions. Apple bread pudding, black coffee.

 88. Tomato soup with crackers. Warm pop corn or roasted chestnuts.

 89. Fresh codfish with horse-radish sauce and boiled potatoes. Black
 bread with butter.

 90. Peanut roast with tomato sauce and celery.

 91. Polenta with apricot or cranberry sauce and cheese.

 92. Boiled whole wheat with butter or hot cream and cucumbers. Nuts.

 93. Baked rolled oats with cranberry sauce, celery.

 94. Smoked goose breast with apple salad and black bread.

 95. String bean soup. Lima beans or cow beans with bacon. Oranges.

 96. Asparagus salad. Spring lamb with caper sauce, bread and butter.

 97. Cherry soup. German pancakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.

 98. Blackberry soup. Cereal or bread omelet with lettuce and syrup
 dressing.

 99. Milk soup with sago. German pancakes with gooseberry compote.

 100. Wine soup with wafers. Fish-pudding with apple sauce.

 101. Milk soup with buckwheat groats. Boiled fish with potatoes and
 currant sauce.

 102. Plum soup with zwieback. Steamed or plain bread pudding.

 103. Bread soup with apples. Liver pudding with tomato puree.

 104. Celery-root salad with crusts. Plum pudding with wine sauce.

 105. Bran or bread soup. Apple salad with grated cheese.

 106. Milk or huckleberry soup. Unleavened apple pancakes.

 107. Clabber milk with cream and grapenuts or stale bread. Nuts if
 desired.

 108. Corn bread with apple salad and lettuce. Nuts.

 109. Plain milk rice with currants. Nuts.

 110. Oatmeal soup. Ham with kale and fried potatoes.

 111. Bread dumplings with stewed prunes or pears, celery.

 112. Fried herring with potato salad. Apple-bread pudding.

 113. Buttermilk soup with dried fruit. Nuts if desired.

 114. Meat cakes with mashed carrots or beets and lettuce salad.

 115. Peas with codfish, butter and bread.

 116. Vegetable pudding with tomato puree and yellow dock.

 117. Bread fritters with lettuce and syrup dressing or stewed prunes.

 118. Baked oats or barley with bologna. Nuts if desired.

 119. Whole wheat or rice with bologna. Nuts if desired.

 120. Plum salad with raw rolled rye or wheat. Walnuts.

 121. String bean salad. Fish pudding with tomato puree or apple sauce,
 celery.

 122. Salisbury steak with fried parsnip and lettuce salad.

 123. Steamed mashed pumpkin with pickled tongue or corned beef. Black
 bread with butter.

 124. Watercress salad. Pork tenderloin with tomato puree and roasted
 yellow turnips.

 125. Lettuce salad with mayonnaise dressing. Apple or tomato rice with
 fish or boiled beef.

 126. Lettuce or celery salad with mayonnaise dressing. Currant or
 cherry rice with fried eggs.

 127. Asparagus with cream sauce and cold boiled ham and bread.

 128. Empire salad. Bread pudding with wine sauce.

 129. Kidney soup with rice and egg. Cooked celery-roots and kidney
 hash on toast.

 130. Huckleberry soup with white of egg. Roman meal cakes with lettuce
 and syrup dressing.

 131. Dried cherry soup with zwieback. Steamed or baked rice pudding
 with lettuce and syrup dressing.

 132. Barley soup with prunes. Cold sliced beef with mustard sauce and
 string beans.

 133. Asparagus salad. Broiled chicken with tomato puree, triscuit with
 butter.

 134. Blackberries with one glass of rich milk and bananas. Nuts if
 desired.

 135. Banana and apple salad with lettuce, French or mayonnaise
 dressing. Nuts.

 136. Tomato and cucumber salad with lettuce, French or mayonnaise
 dressing. Fish with bread and butter.

 137. Watercress salad with French dressing. Veal stew with mushrooms
 and rice.

 138. Cabbage salad with mayonnaise dressing. Hard boiled eggs with
 whole wheat bread and butter.

 139. Kidney soup with rice. Brown kidney stew on toast with asparagus.

 140. Noodle soup. Boiled brisket with horse-radish sauce, bread and
 butter.

 141. Bread soup with cream. Cold sliced boiled meat with string beans,
 triscuit with butter.

 142. Cherry soup. Corn meal pudding with lemon sauce.

 143. String bean soup. Fried left-over pudding with fruit sauce.

 144. Blue fish with steamed potatoes, parsley and butter. Apple-bread
 pudding.

 145. Spinach with egg. Fried fish with crust-potatoes and apple sauce.
 Oranges, toast with butter, black unsweetened coffee.

 146. Green pea soup with fried bread. Pickled tongue with fried
 parsnips and lettuce salad. Green grapes.

 147. Fish croquettes with apple salad. Steamed rice pudding with wine
 sauce. Black unsweetened coffee.

 148. Apple snow on leaves of lettuce. Boiled white fish with drawn
 butter sauce and steamed potatoes, Roman meal cakes with apple sauce.
 Black unsweetened coffee.

 149. Stuffed tomatoes with lettuce. Plum pudding with butter sauce,
 celery. Black coffee.

 150. Lettuce and apple salad with grated Swiss cheese. Pumpkin pie
 with black coffee.

 151. Artichokes with mayonnaise dressing. Broiled steak with baked
 potatoes and sprouts. Blue or red grapes.

 152. Rice and tomato soup. Fillet of beef with mashed potatoes and
 stewed dried mushrooms. Apple tart with black unsweetened coffee.

 153. Creamed onions. Fried chicken with cranberry compote and endive
 salad. Triscuit with butter, black unsweetened coffee.

 154. Tomato and celery salad with mayonnaise dressing. Baked beans
 with lemon. Boston brown bread, coffee.

 155. Apple sago with whites of egg and cream. Baked white fish with
 lemon and creamed potatoes. Apple pudding, black coffee.

 156. Cantaloupe with lemon. Sliced bananas with whipped cream. Pecan
 or almond nuts.

 157. Green pea broth with crackers and butter. Fried oysters with
 sauerkraut, bread and butter. Apple fritters with black unsweetened
 coffee.

 158. Tomato and lettuce salad. Navy or butter beans with carrot puree
 and fried beachnut bacon. Toast with butter and black unsweetened
 coffee.

 159. Broth with egg and crackers with butter. Macaroni and cheese with
 sprouts. Tomato gelatine.

 160. Eggs with spinach and buttered toast. Cherry pie with black
 unsweetened coffee. Oranges.

 161. Tomato puree and cabbage rolls with fried parsnips. Fruit
 gelatine.

 162. Banana and date salad with lettuce. Pecans.

 163. Barley soup. Baked fish and potato puree. Fried black toast with
 butter and unsweetened coffee.

 164. Veal broth with sago. Veal with bread dressing, stewed prunes or
 rhubarb. Black coffee.

 165. Watermelon. Meat croquettes with mashed or pickled beets, celery.

 166. Cherries, apricot and lettuce salad. Nuts.

 167. Cream of tomato soup. Corn bread with spinach and boiled eggs.
 Baked apples in gelatine.

 168. Cream of celery soup. Cold boiled beef with olives and endive
 salad. Bread pudding with wine or fruit sauce.

 169. Cream of potato soup. Smoked eel with apple and lettuce salad.
 Oranges, black toast and black unsweetened coffee.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                           MENUS FOR SUPPER.


 1. Rice soup with crackers. Plum pudding with wine sauce.

 2. Corned beef with sprouts, zwieback with butter and apple sauce.

 3. Clam chowder with soda crackers and fruit.

 4. Milk soup with black toast. Grapes.

 5. Apple salad with bacon and black toast. Oranges.

 6. Pea soup with crackers or raw celery. Grapes.

 7. Apple salad with fish and black toast. Grapes or oranges.

 8. Stewed prunes with cream and shredded wheat.

 9. Artichokes with dressing. Creamed beef on toast.

 10. Potato soup with shredded wheat and raw celery.

 11. Barley soup with soda crackers and raw celery.

 12. Sprouts with pickled tongue. Banana gelatine.

 13. Lettuce with omelet and apple sauce.

 14. Beef soup with rice. Boiled beef with sprouts, prunes.

 15. Tomato soup with shredded wheat, raw celery.

 16. Milk-rice with soda crackers or stale black bread.

 17. Broth with egg and toast. Puffed wheat with butter and fried bacon.

 18. Three-fourths to one pint of fresh milk with tomato toast.

 19. Meat soup with rice and egg. Triscuit, butter.

 20. String bean salad with mayonnaise dressing. Bran bread with
 butter, bacon.

 21. Milk-or apple-rice with codfish cakes. Raw celery.

 22. Cream of pea soup with soda crackers. Raw celery.

 23. Date and lettuce salad with bread and butter.

 24. Buckwheat gruel with cream and toast with honey or syrup.

 25. Huckleberry pie with fresh milk or malt coffee.

 26. Sago gruel with milk or cream and toast with apricot jam.

 27. Baked bananas with black or bran bread and butter, malt coffee.

 28. Blue grapes. Left-over steamed pudding with wine sauce.

 29. Black stale bread with fig butter and rich fresh milk.

 30. Fruit soup of plums or huckleberries, with whites of egg and toast
 with butter.

 31. Bread soup with cream or butter, and soaked French prunes.

 32. Whey or buttermilk soup, with soaked French prunes.

 33. Stewed prunes with cream. Lemon pie with black malt coffee or milk.

 34. Poached or soft boiled eggs, with bread and butter.

 35. Apple or cranberry pie with hot or cold milk.

 36. Baked apples with cream. Shredded wheat or bran bread with butter,
 bacon.

 37. Warm chocolate pudding with cream and one glass of milk with toast.

 38. Red fruit pudding with cream. One glass of milk with toast.

 39. Potato soup with black bread, raw celery.

 40. Apple or cranberry pie. Pine kernels.

 41. Fruit or vegetable toast with fried bacon. Oranges.

 42. Knorr’s pea soup with cream and crackers. Raw celery.

 43. Musk or watermelon. Creamed chipped beef, triscuit with butter.

 44. Warm boiled custard with fruit sauce, black crusts or toast.

 45. Barley soup with soda crackers. Creamed fish with baked apples.

 46. Green pea soup with fried bread. Fruit cake and cereal coffee, raw
 celery.

 47. Broth with egg. Steamed pudding with fruit or tomato sauce, raw
 celery.

 48. Clam broth with crackers. Egg toast with fruit sauce.

 49. Buckwheat gruel with cream. Fish with apple sauce and toast with
 butter.

 50. Sago gruel with cream. Huckleberry pie with milk or coffee.

 51. Baked bananas. Apple bread pudding with milk or coffee.

 52. Blue grapes. Fried steamed pudding, or hominy cakes with fruit
 sauce.

 53. Rice with milk. Black toast with fig butter or honey.

 54. Blue plum soup with sago and whites of egg. Pumpkin pie with
 coffee.

 55. Bread soup. Chops or beef with apple salad and mayonnaise dressing.

 56. Pea broth. Tripe with tomato or whey sauce and toast with butter.

 57. Melon with lemon or berries. Codfish cakes with bread and butter.

 58. Cream of corn soup with tomato toast.

 59. Rice flour with hot cream or milk. Toast with eggs.

 60. Milk rice with soda crackers or toast.

 61. Clear broth with crusts. Eggs and macaroni with fruit sauce.

 62. Apple salad, puffed wheat with butter and fried bacon.

 63. Broth with egg and cracker. Sprouts with lamb, toast with butter.
 Oranges.

 64. Fresh milk with tomato toast.

 65. Apple or tomato salad with mayonnaise dressing. Fish with lemon
 and toast with butter.

 66. Apple and celery salad. Fruit cake with black coffee.

 67. Raspberries or strawberries, dry toast or shredded wheat, one or
 two glasses of rich fresh milk.

 68. Tomato or blackberry toast, with one or two glasses of rich milk.

 69. Fruit gelatine with cream. Sandwiches, black coffee.

 70. One or two glasses of sterilized blackberry juice with zwieback.
 Omelet with fruit sauce.

 71. Clabber milk with cream and dry toast. Nuts if desired.

 72. Lemon pie with fresh milk, or sand tart with fruit salad.

 73. Raw huckleberries and zwieback with sweet butter. Nuts if desired.

 74. Asparagus or artichokes with mayonnaise dressing. Sandwiches.

 75. Boiled skim-milk with black bread.

 76. Meat soup with barley. Apple salad or bread with Swiss cheese or
 cream cheese or cottage cheese.

For additional menus see recipes of soups, gelatines, salads, fish,
sandwiches and egg foods.

Many of the above menus are suitable for children and for people of
sedentary habits.

For those who require a liberal amount of nutritious food, it is easy
to make up a number of additional menus from light protein foods
for the evening meal, such as: Cream cheese, cottage cheese, Swiss
cheese, fish, lamb chops, meat cakes (prepared from left-over cooked
meats), eggs, pancakes (prepared with eggs or cream), fried egg-toast,
sausages, legume soups, etc. Apples, tomatoes and prunes combine well
with all the above mentioned foods.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                       POOR MAN’S BILL OF FARE.


Suitable for people who perform hard manual labor, out of doors, and
for those who are not steadily employed.


Sample Menu.

How to feed a family of five (2 adults and 3 children under 12 years of
age) on $5.00 per week or 14 cents per person per day--71 cents per day
for all.


BREAKFAST.

Cereal salad with apples and onions.

                                                  Cost in Cents.

Rylax or rolled wheat               2¹⁄₂ cups           2¹⁄₂
Apples                              3 large             5
Cotton seed oil                     3 tablespoons       2
Lemon                               ¹⁄₂                 1
Onion                               1 whole             ¹⁄₂


DINNER.

Lettuce with syrup dressing. Dried green peas with dumplings and fried
bacon.

Lettuce                             1 head              2
Syrup                               3 tablespoons       1
Lemon or vinegar                    2 tablespoons       --
Cotton seed oil                     3 tablespoons       2
Onion                               1 whole             ¹⁄₂
Peas                                1 pound             5
Flour                               1¹⁄₂ cups           3
Bacon                               ¹⁄₂ pound           15


SUPPER.

Cream of tomato soup with dry toast.

Tomatoes                            1 can               8
Soup stock                          1 quart             5
Milk                                1 quart             8
Butter                              3 tablespoons       4
Flour                               4 tablespoons       ¹⁄₂
Toast                               7 large slices      4
                                                       --------
                              TOTAL                    69 Cents

If porridge with milk is desired for breakfast, substitute a
quart of milk in place of apples, oil, lemon and onion. Use one
and three-fourths cup of rolled wheat or rye in place of two and
one-half cups. If sugar is necessary, add fifteen prunes or five
level tablespoons of sugar. During the summer, substitute carrots or
cucumbers for the sweets. Raw, sweet or sub-acid fruits do not combine
well with cooked cereals. Raw fruits and raw cereals is a better
combination.

In order to reduce the cost of living to 10 cents per person per day
or 50 cents per day for all, leave out the fat meat costing 15 cents,
and some of the butter, replacing it by cooking oil. It is easy to
modify the diet or add to it in a given direction. If more protein is
required, a boiled egg or a few nuts may be added to the breakfast. If
more fuel is needed, it can be added in the form of soup, fruits or
fat. In comparing the value of 1 pound of legumes with 1 pound of lean
meat and the additional fatty and green foods that are necessary with a
meat diet, the housewife will realize that she must either have a big
purse for the bills of fare with meat, or starve her family if they do
not like legumes.

Ten cents per day is a small sum for a useful citizen to live on, yet
thousands of people are compelled to do so every year, and for these
the following pages might be of assistance.

Economical management, self-denial and abstinence from luxuries are
the lessons to be studied. Look over the chapter on protein foods
carefully. Never economize in these in order to buy cake, pastry
or sweets. All who, for some reason or other, have to fight off
starvation, will find that whole wheat bread and pure water or oatmeal
porridge are the most perfect foods to keep them in fair health. They
prevent diseases which might be the result of such conditions. To
keep up on tea, coffee, sugar, white bread and liquor might result in
dangerous breakdowns, insanity, murder and suicide. Coffee, tea and
alcohol are medicines; they are valuable at times for the sick, when
the system cannot digest food, or under conditions where not sufficient
natural food can be obtained. On such occasions they may prevent
disease and death.


HOUSEHOLD BOOKKEEPING

=====+======+===========+=======+========+==========+======+==========
     |      |           |Protein|Cereals |  Green   |Fruits|Stimulants
     |Income|Expenditure| Foods | Bread  |Vegetables| Fats |and Misc.
     |      |           |       |Potatoes|          | Sugar|
=====+======+===========+=======+========+==========+======+==========
 1   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 2   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 3   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 4   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 5   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 6   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 7   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 8   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
 9   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
10   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
11   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
12   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
13   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
14   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
15   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
16   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
17   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
18   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
19   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
20   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
21   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
22   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
23   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
24   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
25   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
26   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
27   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
28   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
29   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
30   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
31   |      |           |       |        |          |      |
-----+------+-----------+-------+--------+----------+------+----------
Tot’l|      |           |       |        |          |      |
=====+======+===========+=======+========+==========+======+==========

Monthly total receipts, $ ....

Savings, $ ....

Knowledge of bookkeeping is a necessity for systematic homekeeping.
The experience gained from a household book with careful planning for
one year is of more value than the experience gained from five years
of unsystematic housekeeping. Wise management of a home will enable a
family with a moderate income to enjoy comforts and pleasures, of which
a family in better circumstances, but with poor and unwise management,
is deprived.

“Time is money,” therefore careful planning of the time that is
expended for work, rest, recreation and outdoor life is as important
as management of finances. Many women waste much valuable time with
nonsensical details in the line of cleaning, cooking and fancy sewing.
This abnormal amount of manual work and neglect of mental development
is generally followed by worry and poor health, as the result of an
anemic brain. In those conditions mental healers perform miraculous
cures either by changing the activity of the mind or by paralyzing it
to the extent of ignoring the plain facts of nature, and by denying the
testimony of the senses.

The modern household is full of unwholesome things,--too many pictures,
carpets, curtains and other ornaments, and too many salted, peppered,
sugared and greasy artificial foods, with a lot of unnecessary dishes
and utensils. A woman who enjoys spending all her time in drudgery,
values herself below the poorest paid day-laborer.

To save time and strength means investing time and strength on more
important subjects, such as harmonious conversations, out of door
exercise, attending lectures, and the teaching of the laws of health
and hygiene to the young, which cannot be begun too early. Unsystematic
management of household work and the care of children has broken up
many a home.


               HOW TO FEED A FAMILY OF FIVE (2 ADULTS AND
               3 CHILDREN) ON $3.50 PER WEEK OR 10 CENTS
                       PER PERSON PER DAY DURING
                            FALL AND WINTER.

  Staple foods for two weeks.                    Cost in cents.
Flour                            10 pounds                   35
Graham or whole wheat bread      3 loaves                    15
Rye bread                        1 loaf                      10
Sugar                            1 pound                     05
Cereal coffee                    1 package                   20
Coffee beans                     ¹⁄₄ pound                   10
Bran                             1 package                   15
Roman meal                       1 package                   15
Rolled or steel-cut oats         1 package                   10
Rice                             2 pounds                    10
Potatoes                         4 pounds                    20
Tomatoes                         3 cans                      25
Bacon                            ¹⁄₂ pound                   15
Dry peas                         2 pounds                    10
Dry beans                        2 pounds                    10
Lentils                          1 pound                     05
Corn meal                        3 pounds                    10
Dried prunes                     4 pounds                    25
Cheese                           ¹⁄₂ pound                   10
Onions                           1 pound                     05
Macaroni                         1 pound                     10
Salt                             1 bag                       05
Vinegar                          1 pint                      05
Cotton seed oil                  2 quarts                    50
Apples                           6 pounds                    25
Syrup                            1 pint                      05
Pumpkin                          1                           10
Eggs                             ¹⁄₂ dozen                   25
Rolled rye                       1 package                   15
Butter                           2 pounds                    45
Corn starch                      1 package                   10
Rolled wheat                     1 package                   10
                                                           ----
    Total                                                 $4.95


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Roman meal cakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Hot skim-milk with black crusts. Macaroni with grated cheese.

=Supper.=--Meat soup with tomatoes and rice. Fried bread with apple
sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: One gallon of skim-milk 5 cents,
lettuce 5 cents, beef brisket 15 cents,--total 25 cents.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Baked pumpkin, lettuce salad with raw rolled rye.

=Dinner.=--Warmed-over macaroni with soup stock, meat with tomato sauce.

=Supper.=--Hot skim-milk with black crusts or stale bread.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: None.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oatmeal porridge with butter or left-over boiled
skim-milk.

=Dinner.=--Mixed boiled dinner of beans, potatoes and carrots.

=Supper.=--Soup from left-over scraps of tomatoes and meat, thickened
with fat and flour, or pumpkin pie and black coffee or hash.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Carrots and parsley 5
cents,--total 5 cents.

REMARKS: A portion of the skim-milk should be boiled on Sunday and
balance be put in a pan for cottage cheese.

On Monday put one-half of the two pounds of beans in an earthen pot
to bake before the carrots and potatoes are added. Preserve the baked
beans with oil and keep in a cool place until Thursday.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rice with carrots and frankfurters.

=Dinner.=--Green pea soup. Codfish with butter sauce and potatoes with
parsley.

=Supper.=--Left-over soup. Egg toast with stewed prunes or apple sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Frankfurters, 5 cents, fish, 15
cents,--total 20 cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Corn meal mush or cakes with raw or stewed apples or
prunes.

=Dinner.=--Cottage cheese with apple or potato salad and lettuce.

=Supper.=--Bread soup. Apple pancakes with lettuce salad.

Cost for additional foods for Wednesday: None.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--White or black toast with whey sauce (use whey which is
drained from cottage cheese).

=Dinner.=--Lettuce salad. Raw carrots with baked beans. Brown bread
with butter.

=Supper.=--Tomato and meat soup with toast. Celery.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Lettuce 5 cents, carrots 5
cents, parsley and celery 5 cents, Boston brown bread 10 cents, soup
bone 5 cents,--total 30 cents.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oatmeal porridge with butter and syrup.

=Dinner.=--Milk soup with Roman meal. Fried herring and potatoes with
parsley.

=Supper.=--Lentil soup with fried bread.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Skim-milk 5 cents, herring 10
cents,--total 15 cents.

Total expenditure for the first week, 95 cents.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Corn meal cakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Potato soup (prepared with fat, flour and skim-milk).
Noodles with stewed prunes.

=Supper.=--Hot skim-milk with stale bread.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: None.

REMARKS: Bake bread from one-half of the ten pounds of flour, mix with
Roman meal instead of whole wheat flour.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Bran muffins with stewed prunes.

=Dinner.=--Water rice with raisins or currants. Nuts.

=Supper.=--Corn starch pudding with stewed prunes and black crusts.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: 1 pound of nuts 10 cents, raisins
5 cents,--total 15 cents.

REMARKS: Prepare the corn starch pudding on Saturday. Use balance of
skim-milk with one-half water, a piece of butter, the yolk of an egg,
some salt and a little sugar.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rolled rye with butter and syrup.

=Dinner.=--Noodles with tomato sauce and liver.

=Supper.=--Potato soup with parsley and toast. (Prepare with fat, flour
and left-over gravy from liver.)

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Liver 15 cents,--total 15 cents.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Corn bread or fried mush with lettuce and syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Dried peas with flour dumplings and bacon sauce. Stewed
prunes if desired.

=Supper.=--Corn meal porridge with skim-milk.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Skim-milk 5 cents, lettuce 5
cents,--total 10 cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oat meal porridge with butter.

=Dinner.=--Lima beans with frankfurters and raw carrots.

=Supper.=--Stale bread with prune jam. Fresh milk diluted with barley
water.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Beans 5 cents, frankfurters
10 cents, fresh milk 10 cents, carrots and parsley 5 cents,--total 30
cents.


THURSDAY (Thanksgiving).

=Breakfast.=--Rolled wheat porridge with butter.

=Dinner.=--Apple salad with lettuce. Blood or liver sausage with rolled
rye or black bread or baked oatmeal with cranberry sauce and celery.

=Supper.=--Tomato and lentil soup with fried bread.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Lettuce 5 cents, sausage 15
cents,--total 20 cents.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Porridge from any kind of cereal with butter.

=Dinner.=--Cooked greens (pick some mustard or yellow dock on the
street). Bread or flour dumplings with creamed fresh or salted codfish.

=Supper.=--Milk soup from stale bread and skim-milk.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Fish 10 cents, skim-milk 5
cents,--total 15 cents.

Expenditure for staple foods                    $4.95
Additional expenditure for first week             .95
Additional expenditure for second week           1.10
                                                 ----
  Total                                         $7.00

  Staple Food for Two Weeks:                          Cost in Cents.
Baking powder                    1 can                        15
Dried apples                     2 pounds                     15
Pearl barley                     2 pounds                     10
Flour                            10 pounds                    35
Sugar                            1 pound                      05
Rice                             2 pounds                     10
Eggs                             ¹⁄₂ dozen                    25
Apples                           6 pounds                     25
Leaf lard                        2 pounds                     10
Shoulder of mutton               3 pounds                     15
Dried peas                       2 pounds                     10
Beans                            2 pounds                     10
Lentils                          2 pounds                     10
Bacon                            ¹⁄₂ pound                    15
Corn meal                        3 pounds                     10
Rolled rye                       1 package                    15
Oats                             1 package                    10
Wheat                            1 package                    10
Onions                           1 pound                      05
Cabbage                          1 head                       05
Lettuce                          3 heads                      05
Black bread                      1 loaf                       10
Whole wheat flour                2 pounds                     10
Buckwheat flour                  1 package                    15
Potatoes                         4 pounds                     20
Cotton Seed Oil                  2 quarts                     50
Cheese                           ¹⁄₂ pound                    10
Apples                           6 pounds                     25
Butter                           ¹⁄₂ pound                    20
Tomatoes                         3 cans                       25
Milk delivered for two weeks     1 quart per day            1.25
Crackers                         1 package                    05
Nuts                             2 pounds                     20
                                                            ----
                                               Total       $6.05


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mixed rolled rye and wheat porridge with butter and syrup.

=Dinner.=--Cabbage with mutton and bread and butter.

=Supper.=--Soup of mutton with rice and crackers. One-half quart of
milk with barley water and toast for two children.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: None.

REMARKS: Prepare sufficient bread for two weeks. If cabbage is left
over, prepare it with fat, vinegar and flour and keep for Tuesday.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Lettuce with syrup dressing and buckwheat cakes.

=Dinner.=--Rice soup with milk and raisins. Nuts.

=Supper.=--Left-over meat soup and bread for three. Milk and toast for
two children.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: None.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oatmeal porridge with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Lettuce with syrup dressing. Roman meal cakes. Hash of
mutton.

=Supper.=--Baked apples in oil with black bread and residue of leaf
lard with fried onions. One pint of milk and toast for two children.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: None.

REMARKS: Cut the leaf lard very fine, fry it in a pan with apples and a
little oil.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cornmeal mush with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Bean soup with bread. Cabbage and frankfurters.

=Supper.=--Pearl barley porridge with milk and cracker (for all).

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Frankfurters 5 cents,--total 5
cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Three raw apples with black bread and lard.

=Dinner.=--Noodles and kidney stew. Bread if desired.

=Supper.=--Cream of green pea soup with bread and celery.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Celery 5 cents, kidney 5
cents,--total 10 cents.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mixed rolled rye and wheat porridge with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Mixed boiled dinner of beans, carrots and potatoes.

=Supper.=--Milk of soup for all.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Carrots and parsley 5
cents,--total 5 cents.

REMARKS: Keep one-half of the beans separate and bake for Sunday.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cornmeal pancakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Cream of corn soup. Meat croquettes and stewed dried apples.
Bread.

=Supper.=--Bread soup with milk (for all).

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Canned corn 10 cents, Hamburg
steak 5 cents, skim-milk 5 cents, lettuce 5 cents,--total 25 cents.

REMARKS: Prepare the corn soup with fat and flour, then add hot
skim-milk. Use one pint of fresh milk for the bread soup and the
balance skim-milk.

Total Expenditure for the week       50c.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oatmeal porridge with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Baked noodles with milk and frankfurters.

=Supper.=--Mustard greens or yellow dock with lentils. Milk and toast
for two children.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: Frankfurters 5 cents, total 5
cents.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Three raw apples and black bread with lard.

=Dinner.=--Lettuce salad with French dressing. Baked beans and bread.

=Supper.=--Milk toast for all.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: Lettuce 5 cents, milk 5
cents,--total 10 cents.

REMARKS: Re-boil the skim-milk from Friday for cooking or baking.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Lettuce with syrup dressing. Cornmeal pancakes.

=Dinner.=--Milk soup with Roman meal. Bran biscuits with cheese and
stewed dried apples.

=Supper.=--Cream of tomato soup with toast and celery.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Celery 5 cents,--total 5 cents.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Chopped apples with syrup dressing and raw rolled rye.

=Dinner.=--Cream of lentil soup. Tripe with tomato sauce and potatoes.

=Supper.=--Toast with apple sauce and hot milk diluted with barley
water.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Tripe 10 cents,--total 10 cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rolled wheat porridge with butter.

=Dinner.=--Mustard greens and unleavened pancakes with syrup or fruit
sauce.

=Supper.=--Cream of pea soup with toast.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Skim-milk 5 cents,--total 5
cents.

REMARKS: Flavor the greens with bacon. Use skim-milk and three eggs for
the pancakes. Set part of the skim-milk for cottage cheese.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Oatmeal porridge with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Lima beans with potatoes and frankfurters or bologna.

=Supper.=--Apple pie with hot milk.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Frankfurters 5 cents,--total 5
cents.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Buckwheat cakes with lettuce or yellow dock and syrup
dressing.

=Dinner.=--Lentil and tomato soup. Cottage cheese with apple salad.

=Supper.=--Bread pudding with fruit sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Lettuce 5 cents,--total 5 cents.

Expenditure for staple foods                     $6.05
Additional Expenditure for first week              .50
Additional Expenditure for second week             .45
                                                  ----
  Total                                          $7.00


               HOW TO FEED A FAMILY OF FIVE ON $5.00 PER
                  WEEK OR 14 CENTS PER PERSON PER DAY
                      DURING THE FALL AND WINTER.

Buy the same staple foods as suggested for the foregoing menus; add
to it: Oranges, bananas, cream, peanut-butter, eggs, bacon, cheese,
tomatoes, apples, rice, peas, celery, string beans, grapes or other
fruits or vegetables.


               HOW TO FEED A FAMILY OF FIVE (2 ADULTS AND
               3 CHILDREN) ON $3.50 PER WEEK OR 10c. PER
                     DAY DURING SPRING AND SUMMER.

Stale, whole wheat, graham and                     Cost in Cents.
    white bread                3 loaves                    25
Flour                          10 pounds                   35
Stale black bread              2 loaves                    15
Cereal coffee                  1 package                   20
Coffee beans                   ¹⁄₂ pound                   10
Bran                           1 package                   15
Roman meal                     1 package                   15
Cream of wheat                 1 package                   20
Rice                           6 pounds                    25
Potatoes                       4 pounds                    20
Tomatoes                       3 cans                      25
Bacon                          ¹⁄₂ pound                   15
Green dried peas               2 pounds                    10
Lima beans                     2 pounds                    10
White beans                    2 pounds                    10
Corn meal                      4 pounds                    10
Dried prunes                   2 pounds                    10
Salt                           1 bag                       05
Vinegar                        1 pint                      05
Cotton seed oil                1 quart                     25
Apples                         6 pounds                    25
Syrup                          1 pint                      05
Rolled rye                     1 package                   15
Rolled wheat                   1 package                   10
Corn starch                    1 package                   10
Butter                         ¹⁄₂ pound                   20
Eggs                           2 dozen                     35
Peanut butter                  1 jar                       25
Dried apricots                 2 pounds                    10
Onions                         1 pound                     05
                                                         ----
                                                        $4.85

REMARKS: Use plenty of parsley, pick green leaves such as mint, yellow
dock, mustard greens and others on the road or in the country. Keep the
eggs on ice or in salt water in a cool place.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mustard greens on toast.

=Dinner.=--Lettuce salad with baked beans and bread with butter.

=Supper.=--Rice and tomato soup with cracker or fried bread.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: Lettuce 5 cents,--total 5 cents.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cereal salad with apples, onions and lettuce.

=Dinner.=--Steamed pudding with apricot sauce.

=Supper.=--Fresh milk and toast with tomato or apricot jam.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: Milk 10 cents,--total 10 cents.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cream of wheat porridge with butter and raw cucumbers.

=Dinner.=--Green pea soup with raw carrots. Left-over pudding.

=Supper.=--Buttermilk rice with prunes.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Carrots 5 cents, buttermilk 5
cents,--total 10 cents.

REMARKS: Cook sufficient pea soup for two meals. (Use two-thirds of the
two pounds of peas.)


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mashed potatoes with buttermilk and bacon sauce. Black
toast.

=Dinner.=--Apple salad with peanut dressing and raw rolled rye or wheat.

=Supper.=--Cream of pea soup with toast and celery or parsley.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Fresh milk 10 cents,--total 10
cents.

REMARKS: Use a pint of milk for the left-over pea soup.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cornmeal mush with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Lima beans with carrots, potatoes and parsley.

=Supper.=--Yellow dock (raw or cooked) and egg toast with stewed prunes.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Carrots 5 cents,--total 5 cents.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mashed turnips or carrots and toast with butter.

=Dinner.=--Lettuce salad with unleavened apple pancakes.

=Supper.=--Meat soup of lamb with rice and tomatoes. Toast with butter.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Shoulder or neck of mutton 15
cents, lettuce 5 cents,--total 20 cents.

REMARKS: Cut the meat in five pieces, cover with a little hot vinegar
for half an hour, pour off; then add soup stock and keep in gelatine
until Saturday.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cream of wheat porridge and butter.

=Dinner.=--Cooked spinach with fish and baked noodles.

=Supper.=--Strawberries with toast and scrambled eggs.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Fish 15 cents, strawberries 10
cents,--total 25 cents.

Total expenditure for the week         85c.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Left-over noodles with tomato sauce.

=Dinner.=--Raw cabbage salad with mayonnaise dressing and lamb in
gelatine. Bread.

=Supper.=--Cream of tomato soup with fried bread and celery.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: Cabbage 5 cents, celery 5
cents,--total 10 cents.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Creamed boiled cabbage with stale bread or toast.

=Dinner.=--Fruit salad of apricots or peaches and lettuce with rolled
rye and nuts (4 to 8 walnuts per person).

=Supper.=--Pancakes or cornmeal patties with fruit sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: Nuts 10 cents, fruit 10 cents,
lettuce 5 cents,--total 25 cents.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rice soup of buttermilk or milk with prunes.

=Dinner.=--Mixed boiled dinner of lima beans, carrots and potatoes.

=Supper.=--Egg toast or pancakes with fruit sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Skim-and buttermilk 10 cents,
carrots 5 cents,--total 15 cents.

REMARKS: Use part of the milk for pancakes. Leave some for clabber milk.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Stale bread with peanut-butter and apples.

=Dinner.=--Clabber milk with zwieback, doughnuts or pancakes (prepared
with eggs).

=Supper.=--String beans and meat stew with dumplings.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: String beans 10 cents, meat 10
cents,--total 20 cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cherries with corn bread or egg toast.

=Dinner.=--Yellow dock on toast. Steamed rice pudding with fruit sauce.

=Supper.=--Raspberries and fresh milk with toasted bread.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Cherries 10 cents, raspberries
10 cents, milk 10 cents,--total 30 cents.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Left-over yellow dock and Roman meal cakes or bran
muffins.

=Dinner.=--Julienne soup with fried bread. Apple rice with peanut
sauce. Raw celery.

=Supper.=--Asparagus with French dressing or butter sauce and
frankfurters or chipped beef and bread.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Asparagus 10 cents, meat 5
cents, celery 5 cents,--total 20 cents.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rolled wheat porridge with butter.

=Dinner.=--Baked noodles with tomato sauce and lettuce.

=Supper.=--Milk soup with black crusts.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Lettuce 5 cents, skim-milk 5
cents,--total 10 cents.

Expenditure for staple foods                   $4.85
Total Expenditure for first week                 .85
Total Expenditure for second week               1.30
                                                ----
        Total                                  $7.00

  Staple Foods for Two Weeks.                       (Cost in Cents.)
Stale whole rye and wheat bread      5 loaves                .40
Roman meal                           1 package               .15
Cream of wheat                       1 package               .20
Rice                                 6 pounds                .25
Potatoes                             4 pounds                .20
Raw tomatoes                         3 pounds                .10
Bacon                                ¹⁄₂ pound               .15
Green dried peas                     2 pounds                .10
Cow beans                            2 pounds                .10
Lentils                              2 pounds                .10
Corn meal                            4 pounds                .10
Salt                                 1 bag                   .05
Vinegar                              1 pint                  .05
Lemon                                ¹⁄₂ dozen               .10
Cotton seed oil                      1 quart                 .25
Olive Oil                            1 bottle                .25
Apples                               6 pounds                .25
Rolled rye                           1 package               .15
Rolled wheat                         1 package               .10
Corn starch                          1 package               .10
Butter                               1 pound                 .20
Eggs                                 2 dozen                 .45
Peanut butter                        1 jar                   .25
Baking powder                        1 can                   .15
Radishes                             2 bunches               .05
Green onions                         2 bunches               .05
Walnuts                              2 pounds                .25
Lettuce                              3 heads                 .05
Celery                               1 bunch                 .05
Carrots                              2 bunches               .05
                                                            ----
                                                           $4.70

A few staple foods, such as coffee, bran and a few cereals, are
supposed to be left over from the last two weeks.

Use peanut butter in place of butter.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Green onions and radishes with bread and butter.

=Dinner.=--Tomato salad and lettuce. Creamed horse beans with parsley.
Bread.

=Supper.=--Rice and tomato soup. Celery.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: None.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Mashed carrots. Lettuce salad and horse beans.

=Dinner.=--Apple and lettuce salad. Nuts (4 to 8 per person).

=Supper.=--Lemon pie with black malt coffee.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: None.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cream of wheat with butter.

=Dinner.=--Lamb or beef stew with dumplings. Celery.

=Supper.=--Green pea soup with fried bread or left-over dumplings.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Meat 10 cents,--total 10 cents.

REMARKS: Prepare enough pea soup for the next day.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Fruit salad of apricots, peaches or plums, and lettuce
with rolled raw wheat or rye.

=Dinner.=--Pea roast or steamed bread pudding with tomato sauce. Celery.

=Supper.=--Fresh berries and toast with milk.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Fruit 5 cents, lettuce 5 cents,
celery 5 cents, berries 10 cents, milk 10 cents,--total 35 cents.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Roman meal cakes with lettuce and syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Buttermilk soup with rice and raisins. Nuts (4 to 6 per
person).

=Supper.=--Egg toast and lettuce with fruit sauce.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Raisins 5 cents, buttermilk 5
cents,--total 10 cents.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Water or muskmelon. Raw rolled rye mixed with chopped
apples and lettuce.

=Dinner.=--Cherries and unleavened pancakes with syrup dressing.

=Supper.=--Green grapes and black bread with cream cheese.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Melon 10 cents, cherries 10
cents, grapes 5 cents, cheese 10 cents--total 35 cents.

REMARKS: Leave one-half of the cream cheese for Saturday.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rolled rye and wheat porridge with hot milk and raw
cucumbers.

=Dinner.=--Cucumber salad. Green peas with dumplings and creamed fish.

=Supper.=--Bread soup (with buttermilk).

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Fresh milk 10 cents, buttermilk 10
cents, peas 5 cents, cucumbers 5 cents, fish 10 cents,--total 40 cents.

Total expenditure for the week                          $1.30


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Stale bread with cream cheese and left-over raw greens.

=Dinner.=--Meat croquettes (of soup meat) with creamed beets and bread.

=Supper.=--Rice and tomato soup with soup stock. Celery.

Cost of additional foods for Saturday: Soup bone 5 cents, tomatoes 10
cents, beets 5 cents, celery 5 cents,--total 25 cents.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Salad of chopped apples and celery with mayonnaise
dressing and raw rolled wheat or rye.

=Dinner.=--Cherry-or currant-or apple-rice. Nuts.

=Supper.=--Tomato salad and egg toast.

Cost of additional foods for Sunday: Fruit 5 cents,--total 5 cents.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Corn meal mush with hot milk.

=Dinner.=--Tomato salad. Stewed lentils with creamed onions.

=Supper.=--Lentil and tomato soup with toast or bread.

Cost of additional foods for Monday: Milk 10 cents,--total 10 cents.

REMARKS: Dilute the left-over lentils and tomatoes with water, add
onions. Cook for 20 minutes, run through a colander, mix with flour and
fat, add hot milk.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Creamed potatoes with frankfurters and parsley.

=Dinner.=--Cherries and corn meal pudding with lemon sauce.

=Supper.=--Milk soup of rice with black crusts.

Cost of additional foods for Tuesday: Cherries 5 cents, frankfurters 5
cents, skim-milk 5 cents,--total 15 cents.

REMARKS: Use left-over corn meal for pudding; add 4 to 5 eggs.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Raw cabbage salad with mayonnaise dressing and bread with
butter.

=Dinner.=--Meat stew with dumplings and lettuce salad.

=Supper.=--Bran muffins and tomato puree. Boiled skim-milk.

Cost of additional foods for Wednesday: Meat 10 cents, lettuce 5 cents,
cabbage 5 cents,--total 20 cents.


THURSDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Cream of wheat gems and lettuce with syrup dressing.

=Dinner.=--Mixed boiled dinner of string beans, potatoes and pears.
Cornbread.

=Supper.=--Corn starch pudding with boiled hot or cold milk and black
crusts.

Cost of additional foods for Thursday: Beans 5 cents, milk 10 cents,
pears 5 cents,--total 20 cents.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Rolled rye porridge with butter and syrup.

=Dinner.=--Bread dumplings or fritters with pea puree or stewed pears.

=Supper.=--Creamed cabbage with frankfurter and bread.

Cost of additional foods for Friday: Frankfurter 5 cents,--total 5
cents.

Expenditure for staple foods                         $4.70
Total Expenditure for first week                      1.30
Total Expenditure for second week                     1.00
                                                      ----
    Total                                            $7.00


               HOW TO FEED A FAMILY OF FIVE ON $5.00 PER
                  WEEK OR 14 CENTS PER PERSON PER DAY
                       DURING SPRING AND SUMMER.

Buy about the same staple foods as suggested for the foregoing menus.
Use less bread and cooked porridge or mushes. Buy more starchy fruits,
such as bananas, stone fruits, melons and raw vegetables; combine them
with toasted bread or raw cereal flakes. For those who eat two meals
per day and have a late breakfast, it is better to combine fruits
with nuts for breakfast in place of cereals. Use rich milk or cream
with fruits for supper in place of those foods suggested in menus for
supper. For other combinations study menus.


SUGGESTIVE MENUS DURING THANKSGIVING WEEK.


WEDNESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Fried sweet potatoes with fried bacon and apple sauce.

=Dinner.=--Stuffed turkey neck with cranberry sauce.

=Supper.=--Tomato soup with fried bread.


THANKSGIVING.

=Breakfast.=--Creamed onions with bread and butter.

=Dinner.=--String bean salad with French dressing. Turkey with apple
dressing, celery, cranberry compote. Plum pudding with sauce. Black
coffee.

=Supper.=--Apple pie with black coffee.


FRIDAY.

=Breakfast.=--A fast or some fruit juice.

=Dinner.=--Plain water rice with turkey gravy.

=Supper.=--Green pea soup with fried bread.


SATURDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Roman meal cakes with cranberry sauce.

=Dinner.=--Brown flour soup from turkey bones. Left-over plum pudding.

=Supper.=--String bean salad. Baked squash with fried bacon.

REMARKS: Cut the turkey into pieces and preserve in gravy.


SUNDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Apple salad with lettuce and mayonnaise dressing. Bread.

=Dinner.=--Green pea soup. Mince pie and cheese.

=Supper.=--Fruit cake with coffee.


MONDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Codfish cakes with apple-or tomato-rice.

=Dinner.=--Boiled onions. Turkey with steamed potatoes and gravy.
Celery.

=Supper.=--Squash or pumpkin pie with black coffee.


TUESDAY.

=Breakfast.=--Buckwheat groats with hot cream.

=Dinner.=--Turkey hash or salad with tomatoes and lettuce.

=Supper.=--Huckleberry soup with sago or dumplings.


RECIPES FOR MIXED BOILED DINNERS.

They are much appreciated in many foreign countries by people of
moderate means. The housekeeper who does her own work can save much
time by introducing a few of these menus at her table. The preparation
of foods in this manner requires less water, it is more of a steaming
process, and fewer dishes and utensils are needed.

Dishwashing becomes a burden in many a large household and the
intelligent homekeeper studies economy in all directions.

I ask in advance that you try the recipes; lay aside prejudice against
some of the good old-fashioned dishes, to which you are not accustomed,
and stop wasting your time over new and fashionable recipes that ruin
your health. Simplicity and knowledge are a great help for a low purse.


I.

Lima Beans with Carrots and Potatoes.

Soak one pound of lima beans in rain or soft water over night, cook
for half an hour, add salt, and then add five good sized carrots cut
to the size of the beans. Cook both for half an hour, then add four or
five potatoes and cook all together until done. Thicken the broth with
corn starch, add chopped parsley and butter. A tablespoon of vinegar
and sugar may be added to the sauce if the flavor is desired. The
carrots may be cooked by themselves; when done, add the water to the
beans and potatoes, pour a little diluted vinegar over the carrots,
let stand 20 minutes, drain off the vinegar and add the carrots to the
beans and potatoes. This is preferable for people who dislike the sweet
taste of the carrots. Serve with pork, bacon, frankfurters or without
meat. Bread is not needed at this meal, as potatoes and carrots furnish
sufficient carbohydrates. If bread is desired, it should be eaten in
place of dessert with a little unsweetened black coffee or malt coffee.


II.

Small White or Brown Beans with Carrots and Potatoes.

Prepare the same as the foregoing. The time for cooking beans depends
on the quality. The carrots should not be added until the beans are
nearly done.


III.

Dried Green Peas with Carrots and Pork.

Prepare the same as the foregoing. Young green peas or string beans may
be used in place of dried ones. The latter are excellent during the
summer in combination, with salted pickled herring or creamed chipped
beef.


IV.

Green Dried Peas with Dumplings.

See recipe for bread or flour dumplings. Cook the dumplings in salted
water and serve with the peas in place of meat or prepare a pea soup
and boil the dumplings in the soup. This makes a perfect meal for
dinner.

Use one-fourth to one-half a cup of dried peas per person, according to
size and age of the individual. Green fresh peas may be substituted in
the summer. Fried bacon is a good addition.


V.

Dumplings with Potatoes and Prunes.

Steam the potatoes. Prepare some nutritious dumplings from flour or
bread with eggs. Heat some butter, bacon fat or oil, add finely chopped
onions, fry until brown, remove from the fire and add two tablespoons
of syrup and some lemon juice or vinegar. Pour the potatoes and
dumplings on a dish, mix with stewed cold or warm prunes, pour the
syrup sauce over it and serve. Serve with lettuce. The syrup sauce can
be thickened with flour and strengthened with the water in which the
dumplings have been cooked; the prune juice can be added in place of
the syrup. Serve with fried bacon. Good during the summer.


VI.

Potatoes, Macaroni and Prunes.

Cook the macaroni until very tender, drain off the water, combine and
serve in same manner as the foregoing.


VII.

Fried Dumplings.

Cut left-over dumplings into thin slices, fry in hot fat or butter
until brown. Flavor with onions if desired.




                               PART FOUR




                              CHAPTER I.

                               DISEASE.


Disease is that condition of the body where there is any departure from
the normal, in function, or structure. It may be local or general, and
may tend to recovery, death or life-long suffering.

Many so-called forms of dyspepsia are brought about by improper eating,
or by eating when not hungry or when tired. In such cases, a regulated
life and the right selection, combination and preparation of foods is
the only means to correct it.


ULCERATION OF STOMACH AND INTESTINE.

Causes: After effects from acute diseases, worry, envy, excesses of
eating or drinking, bony displacements, anemia and overwork. The
patient should consult a physician at once. If certain areas of the
glandular structure of stomach or intestine have been destroyed once,
the normal structure cannot be restored; but with good care and proper
dietetic measures great improvement can take place. Excess of starchy
foods is always harmful. Particles of food not well masticated can
cause much disturbance. The presence of fats in large amounts or
wrongly combined with other foods will also retard digestion; they
cause the pyloric orifice to contract more, and leave the food contents
in the stomach for a long time, and in this way cause fermentation and
putrefaction.

Dyspepsia and indigestion are the beginnings of a disordered metabolism
and if neglected the results are: Nervous prostration, insanity,
consumption, pelvic disorders, difficult child-birth, weak offspring,
different forms of tumors and cancers and a multitude of fashionable
and epidemic diseases.


CONSTIPATION.

The recognized rule is that the bowels should be evacuated once per
day. Nevertheless, there are a number of people whose bowels act only
every second or third day, and whose health is not impaired thereby.
Healthy people who live on natural foods, such as raw fruits, nuts and
grains, or on simple cooked foods with a moderate amount of meat, as
a rule will not find it necessary to resort to artificial means for
evacuation of the bowels.

People, whose diet consists mainly of meats, cooked vegetables and
potatoes mixed with fermentable substances, or those who mix meat with
milk and sweets or soft puddings will find it absolutely necessary
to have a daily evacuation of the bowels, in order to retain perfect
health.


CHRONIC CONSTIPATION.

Different habits of diet have a great effect upon evacuations. People
who suffer from chronic constipation without any particular ailment
or disease may often be greatly benefited by adding a greater amount
of fruits or vegetables to their diet. Others find it necessary to
discard cooked fruits for a while and take oily substances. Some people
are constipated from insufficient protein elements in their food. The
original cause may have been mechanical obstruction. Morbid anatomy
and morbid physiology go hand in hand. Therefore, if proper hygiene
and diet does not correct the condition, the patient should consult a
physician for special treatment.


MALARIA.

Malaria is a germ disease, but like many other germ diseases, the
primary cause is lowered resistance, caused by poisoned air and
adulterated food stuffs. Protection against adulterated food stuffs
depends upon enforcement of pure-food laws, and the training of every
housekeeper in the art of domestic science. Impure milk, whether
poisoned by the milkmen or handled carelessly by the housekeeper,
cannot be turned into good blood. The same is true of other food stuffs.

Dry, pure air is absolutely necessary for the patient who suffers with
malaria. Dwelling places near which are stagnant pools, rain barrels,
marsh land or stores where decayed fruits and vegetables are housed,
are dangerous to people who are afflicted with malaria or any other
germ disease. Mosquitoes are held responsible for both malaria and
yellow fever. They breed in warm weather, wherever stagnant water is
found. To prevent a disease that is spread by animal or vegetable
parasites we must direct our effort against the breeding places of
these disease carriers. Coal oil, poured upon the surface of stagnant
water on streets, or near our homes, is a great help in preventing
the multiplication of mosquitoes. Screens on dwelling houses, dry
basements, plenty of sunshine in the home and the prevention of
accumulation of vegetable refuse can do much toward protection from
these parasites.

People who are afflicted with partial congestion of the portal
circulation have stagnant and poisoned blood, and are more liable to
contract malaria than those whose liver is in good working order. Many
people are under the impression that they have liver trouble if they
put more work upon this organ than it is able to do. Overtaxing of any
part of the body will finally result in congestion and disease.

If mechanical obstructions are responsible for sluggish conditions of
the liver, they should be remedied by anatomical and physiological
adjustment. Deep breathing is of the greatest importance in all
diseases affecting the abdominal organs. Fresh air at night is as
important as during the day. During rainy weather have a fire going
during the night in order to keep the air dry. Protect the body with
warmer clothing after sunset, and wear light woolen underwear if
necessary to avoid chills during sleep.

The diet should be light and nutritious. Avoid all rich condiments,
spices, soft puddings containing milk and eggs, yeast breads and cakes.
Some cases should avoid milk, cheese, shell-fish and other foods rich
in protein.


                THE FOLLOWING SUGGESTIONS MAY BE HELPFUL
                  TO INVALIDS WHO SUFFER FROM CHRONIC
                      AFFECTIONS OF THE LIVER AND
                        INTESTINAL INDIGESTION.

 1. Spend at least four hours per day out of doors.

 2. Take short walks before and after dinner and before and after
 supper. Take deep breathing exercises by open windows before
 breakfast, and exercise the lower limbs while in bed.

 3. Have breakfast at 9 a. m. and supper between 4 and 5 p. m.

 4. Never work or eat when the hands and feet are cold.

 5. Relax and breathe deeply with face down for 20 minutes, three times
 per day before meals.

 6. During damp or rainy weather rest more, eat more greens, citrus
 fruits and fatty foods, and little or none of those foods which are
 rich in protein, such as cheese, whites of eggs, lean meats, nuts,
 beans, canned corn and milk foods, and select protein foods for the
 noon meal in the form of green pea or lentil soup, with or without
 tomatoes, or fat cold pork, fish or bacon in combination with apples,
 mashed beets, carrots or yellow turnips with lemon, hard yolks of eggs
 and fried bacon. Rice with tomato sauce and cold fat meat is also
 good. Black stale bread is best.

 7. For breakfast use fats in the form of mayonnaise dressing with raw
 apples and tomatoes and plenty of onions, also fat meat if desired,
 and corn meal mush with eggs and cranberry sauce and celery; or the
 above mentioned green leaf vegetables. Celery roots, raw or cooked,
 with lemon and toasted bread and butter or fried bacon is also
 good. Use raw carrots, cranberries and beets with greens and French
 dressing. Raw cabbage is also good.

 8. For supper select your food according to your appetite. If you are
 warm, active and energetic, take some raw fresh milk with zwieback
 and tomato or cranberry juice, or suck the juice of one-half or
 one-fourth of a lemon or grapefruit with it, white and yellow skin and
 all, expectorate the residue. Bran tea, barley or oatmeal water with
 one-fourth sterilized cream is good. If you are cold and chilly eat
 a plate of warm soup made of tomatoes or plums, huckleberries, string
 beans or asparagus (treated with lemon), or potato soup, or eat green
 cooked leaf vegetables with lemon and fried bacon, toasted or puffed
 wheat, and butter.

 9. During the dry, frosty season, when the sun is bright during the
 middle of the day, eat a moderate amount of those foods forbidden
 under No. 6, combine them rightly, and take walks in the sunshine
 after dinner.

 10. Mornings and evenings eat about the same foods as suggested in the
 foregoing.

 11. Dress the body according to the changes of temperature.

 12. Avoid over-heated rooms, and stay in bed until the sun rises, if
 necessary.

 13. Keep the bowels in good order by enemas.

 14. Black malt coffee prepared with a few whole or crushed coffee
 beans is of medicinal value if taken in small quantities after meals,
 especially after the noon meal; it acts as a tonic to the liver. Raw
 cranberries may be substituted if desired.

The above mentioned suggestions are for extreme cases of liver
degeneration. They also apply to many chronic, so-called incurable
diseases where the protein and starches of the diet should be limited
in quantity to the minimum, compatible with the requirements of the
individual.

There are cases of liver trouble where there is no interference with
the glycogenic and oxidizing action of the liver, and where an
entirely different diet is required. Therefore, no patient should
attempt to treat a disease by a book, without having his case diagnosed
by a physician and receiving advice as to the special diet required.


TUBERCULOSIS.

It is one of the most fatal diseases that affects men and animals.
It is due to a germ called the bacillus of tuberculosis. This germ,
however, is not the primary cause for the development of the disease.
Wrong environment, unclean air and food are the causes that multiply
these germs. Hereditary weaknesses play an important part, but the
disease itself is never inherited. Lowered vitality, infection through
milk and meat, and careless spitting are in a large measure responsible.

Children of parents who suffer from tuberculosis may grow up into
healthy and strong individuals, if the proper conditions are furnished.
Tendencies to disease are universally manifest in the weaker
structures, and this weaker resisting power is the exact measure of the
power inherent in heredity.

Tuberculosis may affect the lungs or manifest itself in different parts
of the body, and is known under the following names: Potts disease or
curvature of the spine; hip joint disease, when it affects the hip
joint; white swelling or knee joint disease; ankle joint disease; lupus
or skin disease; scrofula, when it affects the glands of the neck;
tuberculous ulceration, when it affects the inside of the intestine;
tuberculous peritonitis, when it affects the outside of the intestine;
and consumption, when the lungs are involved.


PREVENTION OF TUBERCULOSIS.

The House We Live In.

Sunlight is the best known disinfectant. The direct rays of the sun
destroy tubercular germs and the majority of other micro-organisms.
Plants cannot grow without sunshine. Human beings cannot enjoy health
in dark dwelling places, without sunlight. The houses we live in should
contain a large number of windows and glass doors, so as to permit all
rooms to be permeated with sunlight. It is a pity that modern houses,
with all their conveniences and sanitary arrangements, have so little
provision for proper sterilization by sunlight.

Many new modern houses are provided with a lot of unnecessary closet
room, pantries and double stairways, halls and other accessories, which
shut up impure air and prevent proper ventilation. Instead of living
in large, luxurious houses, our health and comfort could be greatly
improved by the investment of more space in artistically constructed
gardens. Smaller houses, long and narrow in form, or wide and short,
according to the location and size of the lot, could be daily
disinfected and sterilized from cellar to attic by the rays of the
glorious sun. A building of this kind may consist of two, four, eight,
ten or more rooms, with one or three floors, and can offer comfort for
one family, or be divided into apartments or flats. A house should be
built on porous ground.

A lower floor, with parlor and spare bedrooms, is more easily
ventilated and kept clean than a high basement with poor flooring, and
no provision for proper airing or the admission of sunlight.

The mother of a family who has to do her own work in a two-story house
could save much time and strength by having her kitchen and dining
room on the upper floor, with hall and stairway and glass door in the
center of the house, which would enable her to attend to the door from
above. A house so constructed could easily be provided with porches
for sleeping, and a place for the children to play during the morning
hours, and in this way relieve the mother of many unnecessary steps.

Large, beautiful gardens call for work which is mixed with brains,
while large houses with fashionable accessories call for slavery and
compel one woman to become the servant of another woman.

All human beings are born with a pair of arms, which by gradual
development enable them to care for their bodies in matters of feeding,
dressing, hygiene and comforts. Assistants in the home are required for
the child, the sick and the helpless.

Modern inventions relieve us partly of house-cleaning and laundry work,
and modern methods of simple feeding and luxurious airing will relieve
us from solving the servant problem and prevent diseases that are
created by wrong living.


TREATMENT OF TUBERCULOSIS.

Clinical experience with hygiene and diet have proved that they are the
most important factors in the treatment of disease.

A certain class of patients who are in the early stages of this disease
may be benefited by a liberal diet, but the larger percentage of
sufferers really have indigestion and can only gain benefit by cutting
down their diet and by living upon plain, non-stimulating food. The
amount of carbo-hydrate foods should be decreased and the amount of
fats increased. Olive oil in combination with raw vegetables, acid
fruits and raw eggs and fat meats should be given daily. They are best
taken for breakfast. The heavier protein foods should be eaten at
the noon meal in combination with a small amount of cereals and raw
greens. The evening meal should consist of broths with egg, cooked
green vegetables, toast and bacon, or of milk foods. If extra milk is
required it should be given with a keen appetite. Food eaten without
relish cannot be properly oxidized and assimilated.

People who are compelled to work while sick should take some extra milk
between 10 and 12 a. m. and during the afternoon. Milk may be taken raw
or boiled, according to the individual requirements. The bowels should
be kept in order by enemas and laxative foods.


RICKETS.

This is a condition where there is interference with the nutrition of
the bones. The bones, like other parts of the body, are injured by lack
of nourishment; they become soft and yielding like wax, and are drawn
by the muscles into deformity. The animal matter which enters into the
composition of the skeleton is in great excess, and the earthy (or
mineral matter) is deficient in proportion. Causes for such conditions
are: Lack of lime and minerals in the food, before or after birth;
impure or inferior milk; fermenting foods; excess of starchy foods,
sweets and meats; insufficient greens, legumes and nut-foods in the
mother’s food, and overwork of the mother before or after birth of
the child; damp and impure air and unhealthy dwellings. The first
symptoms of this disease or a tendency to it can sometimes be detected
in a child during the first year by soft and flabby muscles, excess of
fat, difficulty and backwardness of learning to walk, and in cutting
teeth, extremely narrow chest, continual digestive disturbances with
constipation or greenish looking evacuations, and catarrh of the
bowels. Softening of the bones of the head is often present.

The prevention and treatment of this disease demands careful regulation
of the diet, sufficient sleep, pure air, dry, sunny dwellings, warm
baths, massage and salt rubs. If the child perspires much on the upper
part of the body during sleep, avoid feather pillows and keep the lower
limbs warm by artificial heat if necessary. Avoid pressure on the head
by placing a narrow pillow about two inches in width under the neck,
and no pillow under the head. Keep the child in the lying position as
much as possible. Do not carry it on the arm except when necessary, and
never force it to stand or walk against its own will.

The diet should consist of milk and cream with well cooked strained
pearl barley and steel cut oats or bran, a moderate amount of toast,
calf’s-foot jelly, eggs, strained legumes and fat meats. Raw greens,
fruits and nuts should be given as soon as the child is able to
digest them without difficulty. Always select the food in the right
combination and never allow excesses of any kind. The bowels must be
kept regular by enemas.


OBESITY.

Obesity is a constitutional disease, due to excess of food in general
or to excess of wrong food and interference with the nerve supply
controlling the oxidation processes.

Thousands of people who suffer from this “fat habit” could cure
themselves by proper attention to hygiene and diet. A normal individual
who lives right, thinks right and is engaged in useful work, does not
need to carry useless fat around with him.

Do not take the advice of a friend who promises relief with dangerous
drugs and salves, or excessive steam-baths and violent exercises. A
diet suitable in quality and quantity to the particular constitution,
useful activity, alternated with sufficient rest and recreation, and
plenty of sunlight and dry, fresh air, are the only means to bring
permanent results. A change of occupation is necessary at times. The
dry diet, consisting of the necessary amount of proteins, with a large
amount of raw greens or fruits and fats, and abstinence from tea and
coffee and foods which are rich in starch and sugar, will bring relief
to the majority of people who have a tendency to grow stout.

There are special conditions which require special treatment, such as
tonic baths, massage, sun-baths, osteopathic treatments and special
prescribed diets and exercises which cannot be discussed here.




                              CHAPTER II.

                  CARE AND FEEDING OF CONVALESCENTS.


Convalescence depends much upon the proper food. Fevers require
that the patient’s strength should be kept up. If the body has
been overfed on certain articles, these must be stopped, and those
elements which are needed must be administered in the form of food,
water, air and so on. The fever is nature’s method of throwing off
disease,--and if properly guided it does not become dangerous. A
physician should be sent for at once. The diet prescribed for the
patient and the directions in regard to quantity, temperature and
time of administration should be carried out in every detail, just
like other directions in regard to nursing. Many a patient has been
seriously injured or even killed through the administration of foods
which were forbidden by the doctor. At times there is a special desire
for a particular kind of food. It may be an indication that the
system requires it, and such craving should always be reported to the
doctor, and if possible the physician will suggest such a food or some
substitute which will answer the purpose.

The temperature of the food should be tested before serving. Blood warm
is generally the best. The tray should not be loaded with a variety
of foods. The patient should not be tempted with food unless forced
feeding is indicated.

If the tongue is coated, give a little water with lemon juice before
breakfast, especially if milk foods are to be eaten. If the appetite is
not keen, do not take milk foods for breakfast.


VOMITING.

If vomiting occurs or is continued for any length of time, it may be
checked by giving cold weak tea or black coffee at frequent intervals,
or a few drops of brandy in a tablespoonful of ice water. In many cases
it is better for the patient to have his breakfast in bed for some time
after recovery, especially if the exertion of dressing is tiresome or
the temperature of the room is unsuited to the patient’s condition. A
mild warm room is preferable to an overheated one.


DIET.

Diet for the sick may be classified as liquid, semi-liquid and solid
foods. A liquid diet is generally given only during acute illness or
after operations. The kind of food, as well as the amount and intervals
at which it should be given, are usually prescribed by the attending
physician. Therefore, only a few suggestions are given.

If nourishment by enema is necessary, predigested substances are
the best; peptonized milk and malt extracts or well prepared,
strained gruels of bran and oats, or of bran alone, to which one to
two teaspoonsful of brandy have been added. Black cereal coffee or
weak black coffee are often excellent where stimulation is desired.
The amount should be from one to three ounces at a time, and the
temperature should be luke warm. It must be injected very slowly.

If the patient is of a nervous temperament, or suffers from
irritability of the stomach, he should have as little animal food as
possible, especially for breakfast. As a rule a well prepared water
gruel satisfies the demands of the body until the noon hour. It acts
as a sedative and rests the whole body, and in this way more nervous
energy can be expended for digestion at the noon meal.

There are some exceptions; for example, if a patient has had a restless
night and is exhausted, he may have a cupful of freshly prepared whey
or bran-tea with milk or cream before his breakfast. As a rule such
conditions should not appear during convalescence, and may be prevented
by intelligent nursing and avoidance of unnecessary company.

The greatest care should be taken not to allow a patient to eat rapidly
or to take large quantities at one time, and also to avoid foods which
produce fermentation.


SUGGESTIVE MENUS.


1. Breakfast.

A cup of whey with or without lemon, and albumen water.


10 to 11 A. M.

Five to ten ounces of milk, diluted with gruel or tea.


Dinner.

Gelatine prepared from barley, rice, bran or legumes and a little
zwieback.


3 to 4 P. M.

Cocoa or milk (5 to 10 ounces) with zwieback.


Supper.

Malt coffee with hot cream and milk-sugar and zwieback.

If food is required at 10 p. m. or during the night, whey, blackberry
juice, broth, apple water, orange juice, egg-wine, tea, coffee or
lemonade may be given if allowed.


2. Breakfast.

Water gruel prepared from barley or bran, rye or steel cut oats, cream
of wheat or rice. Malt coffee with triscuit.


10 to 11 A. M.

Broth with the yolk of an egg or fresh milk with crackers or crusts.


Dinner.

Gelatine of wheat or toast with sterilized cream and zwieback or
ryenuts.


3 to 4 P. M.

Milk, coffee, cocoa or eggnog with zwieback or crackers.


Supper.

Chicken or clam broth with one or two tablespoonsful of cream, ryenuts
or zwieback.

Allow the patient to return to simple solid foods gradually. If he
tires easily of one thing, as much variety as possible should be
introduced into the diet, but as a rule no more than three or four
articles should be served at one meal.


3. Breakfast.

Onion gruel, bread gruel, codfish gruel or cornmeal gruel.


10 to 11 A. M.

Milk or barley water with cream and toast.


Dinner.

Toast with poached egg. Asparagus with lemon or cream dressing.


3 to 4 P. M.

Malt coffee, black or with cream, zwieback or unleavened biscuits with
butter.


Supper.

Strained pea soup or cream of tomato soup with zwieback or raw celery.


4. Breakfast.

Bread soup prepared with prunes or imported root beer. (Excellent for
constipation.)


10 to 11 A. M.

Milk or veal broth with the yolk of an egg, and crusts or zwieback.


Dinner.

Puree of dried green peas, beachnut bacon, zwieback, raw celery.


3 to 4 P. M.

Cold water or malt coffee.


Supper.

Beer or wine gruel or boiled custard with zwieback.


5. Breakfast.

Gruel of Cook’s flaked rice or shredded wheat with butter, or hot
sterilized cream.


10 to 11 A. M.

Whey or broth.


Dinner.

Spinach on toast, two eggs, beachnut bacon.


3 to 4 P. M.

Raw bran, oatmeal water, almond milk or hot or cold water.


Supper.

Sago gruel prepared with blackberries, apples or huckleberries
(strained), and zwieback with butter.


6. Breakfast.

Cereal gruel prepared with two-thirds water and one-third milk or
one-fifth cream.


10 to 11 A. M.

Water, whey or tea of beans, peas, lentils or bran.


Dinner.

A raw or baked apple with fish. Lettuce with mayonnaise dressing.


3 to 4 P. M.

Water, bran water or milk.


Supper.

Soup of carrots, peas or asparagus with toast.


7. Breakfast.

Cereal coffee, bran or legume tea, one slice of whole wheat toast, or
stale bread. One egg.


10 to 11 A. M.

Vegetable water or whey.


Dinner.

Green pea soup with raw celery. Raw oysters and crackers with butter.


3 to 4 P. M.

Almond milk, bran water or cold or hot water.


Supper.

Baked apple with sterilized cream. Cream of celery soup with toast.


8. Breakfast.

Milk or water gruel with crusts.


Dinner.

Apple salad and lettuce with sweet breads. Orange juice.


Supper.

Cream of tomato soup or clam broth with toast and raw celery.


9. Breakfast.

Melon. Codfish cakes, raw apples or ambrosia.


Dinner.

Pea or lentil soup. Squab on toast with tomato or apple salad and
lettuce.


Supper.

Cream toast or fruit soup or whey soup.


10. Breakfast.

Lettuce or watercress or celery with or without dressing. Baked
potatoes, one or two eggs and beachnut bacon.


Dinner.

Broth with egg. Cream cheese with apple salad, black toast, olives.


Supper.

String beans, creamed chipped beef, crackers or triscuit.


11. Breakfast.

Green grapes, banana salad with lettuce and French dressing.


Dinner.

Three ounces of strained tomato juice, young peas with bacon or white
fish, triscuit with butter and black cereal coffee.


Supper.

Sliced pineapple with gelatine and cream. Black toast.


12. Breakfast.

Gluten gruel, cream of wheat, or whey gruel.


Dinner.

Beefsteak with egg and spinach. Toast with butter.


Supper.

Milk or fruit soup or green cooked vegetables with bacon.


13. Breakfast.

Asparagus with French or cream dressing, chipped beef or boiled codfish
with one or two tablespoonsful of raw wheat or rye flakes.


Dinner.

Strained tomato juice with buttered toast, or a piece of cucumber. Lamb
chops with sprouts and the yolk of an egg.


Supper.

Cook’s flaked rice gruel with cream or butter and the yolk of an egg.


14. Breakfast.

Lettuce, creamed potatoes with parsley and boiled ham.


Dinner.

Tomato and lettuce salad with dressing. Scrambled eggs with string
beans and bacon.


Supper.

Baked apples in gelatine with cold sterilized cream and unsweetened
graham crackers.


15. Breakfast.

Fruit salad of peaches or apricots with almond cream and grapenuts or
ryenuts.


Dinner.

Boiled beef or chicken with mushroom sauce and rice.


Supper.

Pea soup with buttered toast. Raw celery.


16. Breakfast.

Lettuce, egg toast with cranberry or apricot sauce.


Dinner.

Tomato soup. Lima beans with the yolk of an egg and lemon. Raw celery
and parsley.


Supper.

Green grapes and black toast with butter or fruit pudding with
sterilized hot or cold cream.


ADDITIONAL MENUS.


I.--Light Rice with Egg and Soda Crackers--233 Calories.

Wash two tablespoonsful of rice, boil rapidly in one pint of water with
a little salt until the grains burst. Then boil slowly in the oven or
on the stove (uncovered) until the rice is dry. Remove from the fire
and add one teaspoonful of butter, the yolk of one egg and a few drops
of lemon juice. Serve plain with two soda crackers or one small round
zwieback.

                              Calories.
Rice           2 tablespoons        100
Yolk of egg    1                     48
Butter         1 teaspoon            35
Crackers       2                     50
                                   ----
                                    233


II.--Light Rice with Egg and Cranberry Sauce--263 Calories.

Prepare the same as No. I. Pour two tablespoonsful of cranberry sauce
over the rice.


Cranberry Sauce, Sterilized--190 Calories.

Put one cup of cranberries into a pint jar, add two and one-half
tablespoonsful of sugar and sufficient water to fill the jar; screw
tight and cook in a water bath for 40 minutes or longer. Let cool and
run through a colander.


III.--A Large Glass of Mixed Milk and Cream with Cranberry or Tomato
Toast--525 Calories.

Heat two small round or one long zwieback and soften with two
tablespoonsful of tomato or cranberry sauce. Serve on a plate and drink
the milk with it.

                              Calories.
Milk           8 ounces             165
Cream          4 ounces             230
Zwieback       2 small              100
Fruit Juice    2 tablespoons         30
                                   ----
                                    525


IV.--Cream Toast of Whole Wheat Bread or Shredded Wheat--390 Calories.

Dissolve one tablespoonful of milk sugar in one-half or three-fourths
cup of boiling water and pour over one slice of whole wheat bread or
biscuit. Let stand a minute, then add four ounces of hot cream, and
serve.

                              Calories.
Cream          4 ounces             230
Biscuit        1 ounce              100
Milk Sugar     1 tablespoon          60
                                   ----
                                    390


V.--Cornmeal with Egg and Cranberry Sauce--271 Calories.

Cook three tablespoonsful of cornmeal in one pint of water with a
little salt, for 30 or 40 minutes.

Remove from the fire. Then add one teaspoonful of butter, the yolk of
one egg and a few drops of lemon. Pour on a soup plate and serve with
two tablespoonsful of cranberry sauce and one soda cracker or two black
crusts.

                                  Calories.
Cornmeal           3 tablespoons        108
Yolk of egg        1                     48
Butter             1 teaspoon            35
Crackers or Crusts 2                     50
Cranberry Sauce    2 tablespoons         30
                                       ----
                                        271


VI.--Apple Soup No. 1, with Two Black Crusts--440 Calories.

Heat a tablespoonful of olive oil and one of butter, mix with a
tablespoonful of white flour, gradually add one pint of boiling water
and stir.

When done, wash and grate one red Oregon apple with the skin. Add the
grated apple to the soup, also a pinch of salt, a teaspoonful of sugar
and a stick of cinnamon. Let all boil for about 10 minutes. Remove from
the fire, add another teaspoonful of butter and a few drops of lemon;
mix well, pour on a soup plate and serve with two crusts.

If the stomach is very delicate, the soup must be strained.

                              Calories.
Apple          1 large              100
Flour          1 tablespoon          30
Olive Oil      1 tablespoon         100
Butter         1 tablespoon         105
Butter         1 teaspoon            35
Sugar          1 teaspoon            20
Crusts         2                     50
                                   ----
                                    440


VII.--Apple Soup No. 2, with Black Crusts--535 Calories.

Prepare as the foregoing. Add one-half cup of hot cream before serving;
mix well. Omit the extra teaspoonful of butter, oil and lemon.


VIII.--Apple Soup No. 3, with Black Crust--488 Calories.

Prepare as No. 1. When done, dilute the yolk of one egg with a
tablespoonful of water on a soup plate, stir well and gradually add to
the soup, also add a teaspoonful of butter and a few drops of lemon.


IX.--Apple Soup No. 4, with Black Crusts--515 Calories.

Prepare as No. 2, omitting the sugar. This is good for diabetic
patients.


X.--Apple Soup No. 5, with Black Crusts--468 Calories.

Prepare as No. 3, omitting the sugar. This is also good for diabetic
patients.


XI.--Veal Soup with Sago. Zwieback with Butter--478 Calories.

Wash and soak three tablespoonsful of sago in one-half a cup of cold
or warm water for several hours. Then boil it in one cup of water with
a little salt. When the sago becomes too thick, add one cup of veal
stock. Let it all boil together until the sago is done. Then remove
from the fire, add a teaspoonful of butter and combine with the yolk of
egg as directed for Apple Soup No. 2; also add a few drops of lemon. If
flavoring is desired, boil a finely cut carrot and some parsley in the
water before the sago is added. Remove the vegetables before serving.
Celery is also good for flavoring. Onion does not combine well with
sago. A great variety of vegetables in soup is not good for patients.

Use different ones each time, and the patient will relish it better.

                              Calories.
Sago           3 tablespoons         90
Broth          1 cup                100
Butter         1 teaspoon            35
Yolk of egg    1                     48
Zwieback       2 small              100
Butter         1 tablespoonful      105
                                   ----
                                    478


XII.--Veal Soup with Cream. Crusts or Zwieback--453 Calories.

Prepare like the foregoing, omitting the lemon, butter and egg, and
using three ounces of hot cream.


XIII.--Veal Soup with Green Peas and Zwieback.

Soak one-fourth of a cup of dry green peas in soft water over night.
Boil them in about one pint of water until tender. Then add one cup
of veal stock and more water if the peas are dry. Let all boil for
one-half an hour longer, then strain.

If the soup is for very young children or invalids, do not press much
of the pulp through. Put one zwieback on a soup plate, pour some of the
soup over it, then add one or two ounces of hot cream and serve.

The broth may be mixed with the cream and served in a cup, and the
zwieback eaten with it.


XIV.--Cream of Celery Soup No. 1--293 Calories.

Wash the celery stalks, scrape and cut into one-inch pieces. Boil in a
very little water, with a pinch of salt. When tender, put the celery
into one cup and the water into another cup. Squeeze the juice of
one-half lemon on the celery stalks and let stand for 10 or 15 minutes.
Heat a tablespoonful of butter and mix with a tablespoonful of mixed
flour, and add the hot celery water. If there is not sufficient fluid,
add more boiling water. When done, remove from the fire, add another
teaspoonful of butter, then add the celery; mix well.

If the lemon makes it too sour, pour some boiling water over the
celery, and let it drain through a colander. When ready to serve,
combine the soup with the yolk of an egg, as directed in Apple Soup No.
3.

If vegetables cause fermentation, they are less liable to do so if
treated with acids as directed above.

                              Calories.
Celery         3 stalks              25
Butter         1 tablespoonful      100
Mixed Flour    1 tablespoonful       35
Yolk of Egg    1                     48
Butter         1 teaspoon            85
                                   ----
                                    293


XV.--Cream of Celery Soup No. 2--343 Calories.

Prepare and finish like the foregoing. Add one-half cup of beef, mutton
or veal broth in place of hot water.


XVI.--Cream of Celery Soup No. 3, with Two Black Crusts. 436 Calories.

Prepare like No. 1, omitting lemon, egg and extra butter, and using
three ounces of hot cream instead.


XVII.--Cream of Celery Soup No. 4, with Two Black Crusts.

Cook the celery as directed in No. 1. Add two teaspoonsful of
cornstarch with water, and three ounces of hot cream.


XVIII.--Cream of Asparagus Soup with Black Crusts.

Prepare in the same manner as cream of celery soup, in four different
ways.


XIX.--String Bean Soup, with or without Zwieback.

Select young, tender string beans, wash, trim and shred fine or break
into one-half inch pieces. Cook in a very little water. Finish like
Cream of Celery Soup, with or without lemon, egg or cream.

Add plenty of chopped parsley just before removing from the fire. This
soup is very purifying to the liver and intestines, but should not be
given to fever patients.


XX.--Cream of Cauliflower Soup with Black Crusts.

Prepare the same as Cream of Celery Soup. The use of lemon is important
for people who suffer with gas and flatulent dyspepsia.


XXI.--Whey Gruel No. 1, with Zwieback.

Heat one and one-half cupsful of sweet or slightly sour whey to the
boiling point. Melt a tablespoonful of butter, mix with a tablespoonful
of mixed flour and add the hot whey gradually. Boil a few minutes.
Remove from the fire, add the yolk of an egg and a few drops of lemon
juice. If sour whey is used, add a tablespoonful of cane-sugar while
it boils, or mix the gruel with a few soaked or stewed prunes or with
dried currants. Add cream in place of egg and butter, if desired.


XXII.--Whey Gruel for Two Persons--503 Calories.

Wash one-fourth of a cupful or four tablespoonsful of sago several
times with cold and warm water until the water becomes clear, then soak
in one-half cup of cold or warm water for several hours over night.
Bring two cups of whey to a boil with the peeling of one-half a lemon
or a piece of cinnamon bark. Stir in the sago, let boil 20 minutes,
and add one-fourth teaspoonful of salt. Remove from the fire and add a
teaspoonful of butter, the yolk of an egg diluted with a tablespoonful
of cold water, and a few drops of lemon, or leave out the egg, butter
and lemon, and add three ounces of hot cream. Mix well, pour on soup
plates and serve with soda crackers or zwieback, or one-half of a raw
red Oregon apple. One tablespoonful of sugar may be added if allowed.
Sour whey may be used instead of sweet whey.

                              Calories.
Sago           ¹⁄₄ cup              120
Whey           2 cups               200
Butter         1 teaspoon            35
Yolk of egg    1                     48
Zwieback       2                    100
                                   ----
                                    503


XXIII.--Cornstarch Gruel with Whey.

Dissolve two tablespoonsful of cornstarch in a little cold water. Add
one cup of water to a pint of whey, heat and stir in the cornstarch
and boil 10 to 15 minutes. Finish the same as sago gruel. Rice flour,
arrowroot, white flour or mixed flour may be used instead.


TABLE OF COMMONLY USED FOODS, GIVING CALORIC VALUE.

Almonds, 10 large                       100
Apples, 1 medium                         92
Bacon, 1 pound                         2260
Broth, 1 cup                            100
Bananas, 1 large                        100
Barley, 1 tablespoon, raw                90
Beans, dried, ¹⁄₂ cup, raw              300
Beefsteak, ¹⁄₄ pound (round)            160
Bran, 1 cup                             220
Butter, 1 tablespoon                    105
Blue Fish, 1 pound                      400
Carrots, 1 large                         50
Celery, 12 stalks                       100
Codfish, 1 pound                        400
Cornmeal, 1 tablespoon                   36
Crackers, 1 Uneeda                       25
Cheese, 1 pound American               1800
Cream, ¹⁄₂ cup from separator           230
Cucumbers, 1 large                       40
Currants, 1 cup (dried)                 700
Dates, 10                               260
Eggs, 1 whole                            60
Eggs, 1 yolk                             48
Eggs, 1 white                            12
Figs, 10 large white                    600
Rice-flour, 1 tablespoon                 55
Wheat-flour, 1 tablespoon                30
Mixed flour, 1 tablespoon                35
Cornstarch, 1 tablespoon                 40
Gelatine, 1 tablespoon                   80
Greens, 1 cup                            40
Grapenuts, 1 tablespoon                  30
Honey, 1 tablespoon                     100
Kumyss, 8 ounces                        100
Lamb chops, 1 small                     100
Lemon, 1 whole                           16
Lettuce, 1 head                          40
Macaroni, 1 cup (raw)                   300
Milk, 8 ounces                          165
Oats, rolled, 1 cup (raw)               300
Oats, steel cut, 1 cup (raw)            900
Orange, 1 large                         100
Oil, 1 tablespoon                       100
Peanuts, 15                             100
Peaches, 1                               50
Peas, ¹⁄₄ pound (dried)                 350
Peas, green, 1 cup                      150
Prunes, 5 (dried)                       100
Potatoes, 1 large                       100
Raisins, 10 large                       100
Raspberries, 1 cup                       60
Rice, 1 tablespoon                       50
Syrup, 1 tablespoon                      50
Sugar, 1 tablespoon                      60
Tomatoes, 1 large                        50
Walnuts, 8                              100
Wheat, rolled, 1 cup (raw)              250
Whey, 1 cup                             100




                               PART FOUR




                               APPENDIX.

                       MENTAL HYGIENE AND DIET.


Proper growth and activity of the brain and nervous system are promoted
by a healthy flow of blood. Pure air and sufficient protein food
properly combined and proportioned with carbo-hydrate and fatty foods,
rich in phosphates and minerals, are essential. Choose more of the
lighter form of protein and starchy foods, as fish, eggs, almonds,
green peas, bacon, a moderate amount of lamb and beef, rice, sago,
wheat, and vegetable gelatines. Foods rich in minerals are celery,
apples, tomatoes, greens, oranges, and practically all the fresh fruits
and vegetables, especially the small berries. Melons and starchy
vegetables in large quantities are suitable for muscular workers. Use
as little as possible of so-called pure chemical substances, such as
refined sugar and flour.

Avoid poisonous beverages, tobacco and all forms of drugs. Sleep at
least nine hours in a well ventilated room, facing east or south. Avoid
constipation. Combine mental work with moderate amounts of useful and
enjoyable exercise, or physical work. Protect the eyes from strong
artificial light. Keep the feet warm. Relax before and after meals.
A certain amount of manual labor is absolutely necessary for the
brain-worker. It favors deep breathing and creates a demand for more
air and water, and thus improves digestion, oxidation and nutrition.
The body poisons are carried off quicker and nervous headaches and
despondency are avoided. Short walks out of doors before retiring are
very beneficial for people who suffer with cold hands and feet.


“THE IMMIGRANT.”

All who leave the land of their birth should make themselves acquainted
with the art of living and the peculiarities of the new country in
which they intend to live.

To depart entirely from their old customs and habits is as dangerous
as to neglect the study of the new environment or the failure to adopt
necessary changes.

In some States the climatic conditions of the United States are very
changeable; we have extreme heat and cold, and excess of rain with wind
storms and dryness changing within a short time. West of the Rocky
Mountains we have a mild sea air. In the Southern States and near
the Pacific Coast we have low districts where malaria and catarrhal
conditions are easily acquired.

Tropical fruits and vegetables which are looked upon as luxuries in
Northern Europe are necessary articles of food in the country where
they grow, therefore the stranger should make himself acquainted with
such foods and by degrees learn to eat them.

In countries where the days are extremely hot and the nights are cold,
the selection of foods should be made accordingly. Fats produce more
than twice the amount of energy than carbohydrates, therefore they
are more suitable during the early part of the day. During the middle
of the day select foods of the protein class, in proper proportion
with fruits and raw greens. For the evening meal use the stimulating
sub-acid and sweet fruits in combination with light protein and cereal
foods.


HEALTH HINTS FOR BUSY PEOPLE.

1. Keep the feet warm, the head cool and the stomach not too full.

2. Take walks out of doors daily and breathe deeply.

3. Do not wear tight shoes or tight corsets.

4. Masticate your food thoroughly. Select, combine and prepare it
rightly. Do not overeat.

5. Avoid fresh breads, inferior cakes and pastry.

6. Do not eat unless you are hungry.

7. Do not over-indulge in athletic or any other kind of exercise.

8. Remember that natural feeding, pure air and sufficient sleep call
for natural breathing and natural exercise.

9. Unnatural feeding and late hours create disease or nervousness.

10. Don’t take drugs for sleeplessness.

11. Tired feeling in the morning is the result of nerve starvation and
auto-intoxication.

12. The house we live in should be constructed for health and comfort,
rather than for style.

13. Sleep by open windows. Night air is as pure as day air. Protect
yourself from dampness by an open fire if necessary.

14. Do not dress and wash in a cold bath room. Have your wash bowl in
the bed room.

15. Sewer gas from a small pipe in a well ventilated bed room is not
harmful, as it is carried off in the air. Have the stopper placed in
the hole when not in use.

16. Dress by an open fire or in a sunny room. A chill before breakfast
produces indigestion and a desire for unnecessary hot foods.

17. Never sleep by night lamps or any other artificial light. They are
injurious to the eyes and absorb oxygen.

18. Teach a growing child that selecting and preparing his food is an
important occupation.

19. Do not allow a child to fill his body with trash.

20. Pure water is as important as pure food. If you boil your water the
minerals are deposited on the bottom of the kettle instead of in the
system for bone-making material.

21. Milk is a food, not a drink; it should never be taken in addition
to, or at the end of, a heavy meal.

22. Many people object to boiled milk on account of a theory that it
tends to constipate. Do not dwell on theories; find out the effect for
yourself. Potatoes, toast and many other cooked foods are constipating
also. Why not object to those?

23. Raw foods are more nutritious than cooked foods, if they are pure
and fresh and can be digested without difficulty.

24. A change from cooked to raw foods might produce diarrhœa or
constipation. The latter condition is generally not dangerous.
Constipation from cooked foods is more dangerous.

25. A daily evacuation of the bowels is not always a sign that the
stomach and intestines are in good working order. The bowels can be
forced to move by the eating of too rich foods.

26. Some people are clearer in mind on a vegetarian diet, while upon
others it has no such effect at all.

27. A healthy individual does not need to confine himself to a special
system of diet. Avoid dangerous experiments carried on for orthodox
reasons.

28. Rich soaky cooked nut foods are not health foods. If you want to be
a vegetarian, live on raw foods.

29. Some people thrive on raw foods while others do not. The best time
to begin with raw foods is in childhood.

30. Hot house plants cannot digest raw foods. Open your doors and
windows and learn to breathe first. Fresh air and sunshine are
necessary for the change of food.

31. If your teeth are poor, substitute a food-chopper or grinder for
your foods.

32. The most perfect foods, such as apples, tomatoes, wheat, oats, rye,
legumes and nuts seldom disagree with a healthy individual, provided
they are used wisely.

33. Sunlight is a great disinfectant. Dark rooms are a breeding place
for tuberculous germs.

34. Daily out-of-door exercise in the sunshine will increase health
and reduce the coal bill. Without exercise our food can be of little
benefit to us.

35. By natural feeding, overwork is not possible. The body demands rest
when its strength is exhausted.

36. Artificial stimulants are deceivers. They make a man feel strong
when he is weak. They produce artificial heat and will-power and an
abnormal temperature; they lead to overwork, abnormal development and
degenerate brains and bodies.

37. Natural will-power can direct its force wherever it is wanted, be
it for work or rest; it can sustain on bread and water for many days.

38. Without substance there can be no power. Substantial food, fresh
air, water and natural exercise develop strong bodies and minds.

39. Artificial sweets, white bread and poisonous beverages develop
butterflies that crave excitement and artificial life.

40. The world is full of people that are without substance, power or
principle. They earn their living the easiest way they can. Wrong
feeding is responsible for such conditions.

41. Social reformers and humanitarians cannot solve problems until they
have learned how to feed the race.

42. Many people are under the impression that if a certain food is
recommended as especially healthful, over-indulgence must be beneficial.

43. All natural foods are wholesome; over-eating produces discomfort
and disease.

44. Some fruits and vegetables have high medicinal values. Specific
foods prescribed in large quantities are useful for certain ailments,
but not for a healthy individual.

45. Each individual is a law unto himself. Two different people
afflicted with a disease of the same name may require entirely
different treatment. Human beings cannot be standardized like inert
machines.

46. Canned fruits out of season are not a necessary article of food;
they are of value as a medicine.

47. If certain foods do not agree, or produce indigestion, study their
combination and preparation carefully, also the proportion, and time of
the day when most suitable. If this does not prove satisfactory, leave
them alone.

48. Don’t buy cheap or inferior food of any kind.

49. Don’t always believe your dealer as to the quality of the product.
Investigate for yourself.

50. Don’t use fruits in excess if you lead a very active life. The
right proportion is the key note to maintain balance.

51. Excessive fruits and rest is a prescription for sickness.

52. If no great hunger is felt at a meal, do not eat nuts or any kind
of foods classed as protein. Neither stuff yourself with liquid foods.
A fast or fruits or fruit juices are the best under such conditions.

53. Do not offer a guest more food than he desires. It may be polite,
but it is an unwholesome fashion.

54. Drink sufficient pure natural water between your meals. There is
danger in over-drinking as well as in under-drinking.

55. A definite employment, practical and loving sympathy with our
fellow men and faith in the almighty power of creation is a good
prescription for imaginary diseases.

56. There is a great medicinal force in a mind of peace. If you suffer
from chronic ailments brought on by overwork, seek rest and solitude,
and exercise your soul. The latent powers within you can be awakened by
right study. Give up wrong thoughts and habits.

57. Hard arteries are the result of high-pressure life.

58. Restlessness and sleeplessness are the result of an acid or toxic
condition of the blood.

59. The liver is the great filter and germ destroyer of the body.
Co-operate with nature and treat your liver right. Germs are not
attracted to healthy people.

60. Many lung diseases are often the result of an abused liver.

61. Mouth-breathing is the result of structural and functional
derangement.

62. Children that are allowed to sit with cold feet in the school room
cannot keep their health or study their lessons.

63. A destructive or mischievous child can be corrected by proper food
and sufficient suitable employments.

64. Defective teeth and eyesight are often the result of improper
feeding. Glasses cannot make up the deficiency.

65. Cleanse the mouth and teeth on arising and after each meal.

66. If you wish to prevent colds, stop overloading your stomach.


HYGIENE ECONOMY AND SANITATION.

The pantry shelf with its contents is responsible for many acute
diseases and ptomaine poisoning by unhygienic and careless handling and
preservation of foodstuffs.

A closet for the preservation of food should be located on the north
or east side of the house if possible. It should have several long and
narrow windows from top to bottom, so as to allow plenty of air and
light. The shelves should be constructed of wire, zinc or wooden slats,
and be removable.

Raw fruits and vegetables should never be kept in the same closet with
cooked food. Milk and butter should not be kept near meat or other
cooked foods. Potatoes, carrots and underground vegetables should be
kept out of doors or in a dry basement. They may be preserved in a box
with dry sand.

Onions should not be left in a paper bag; hang them up in the sun or
keep them in a flat box in a dry place. Onions which have been cut
should never be used again for food, unless the cut side has been
preserved in vinegar or oil.

All raw foods which have a thick skin have better keeping qualities
than those with a thin skin; therefore, fancy summer fruits should be
eaten while fresh on the same day they were picked. No more should be
bought than can be eaten the same day, or else they should be preserved
by sterilization.

Green vegetables should be used fresh if possible, and not kept longer
than three or four days. Never keep them in the house or pantry.

Apples or other winter fruits should be kept in a dry store room out of
doors, in the attic or in a dry basement.

The white film that often gathers around grapes is a breeding place for
diphtheria germs. Wash thoroughly before eating all fruits which have
been stored in houses or at the market. Do not prepare more raw food
than can be eaten at one meal. Never allow it to stand after it is cut.

Many housekeepers think it important to scald their dishes, but do not
know that it is far more important to sterilize or reboil cooked foods
which have stood on the shelf for 18 or 24 hours and sometimes longer.
Such foodstuff is dangerous long before the process of fermentation can
be detected by the sense of smell or taste.

Some foods begin to undergo changes immediately after cooling;
therefore, cooked foods left over, with the exception of a few, should
be reboiled before serving again. Rice or other cereals should be
stirred over the fire for a while and then baked in the oven until they
are thoroughly sterile. The care of milk has been discussed in the
chapter on food. Soups which are preserved with fat will keep wholesome
for several days without reboiling. Fruits and fruit juices should
not stand longer than 24 hours. Eggs are best preserved in bran or
lime-water or on ice if kept for a week or longer. Boiled or thoroughly
roasted meats will keep wholesome for 36 hours in a cold place. During
the summer meat should not be kept from one day to another.

If left-over meat is cut from the bone and cooked up in gravy or soup
stock or preserved in gelatine (with fat to cover it), it can be kept
wholesome for 4 or 5 days and longer, according to the manner of
preservation. Half cooked chops and beefsteak should never be kept in
the same manner they are served. They should be cooked thoroughly in
fat or gravy before being put away. All meats should be freshly cut and
cooked the same day after delivery, or be preserved by partly cooking
or roasting, until the next day. Many housekeepers keep roasts, chops
and beefsteak until it looks blue and green with putrefaction before it
is cooked. Never buy meat which has an unnatural color. Be sure that
your butcher does not use poisonous substances to keep the meat from
decomposition. Visit your butcher often and investigate how often he
gets a fresh supply of meat. This is of more benefit than to save time
by telephoning.

Never allow sliced bacon to lie in the ice box or pantry for several
days. It becomes rancid and is unfit for food. Buy your bacon in bulk
and slice it with a sharp knife when wanted.

Do not keep sliced meat of any kind longer than one day in cold
weather. Do not keep it in hot weather without preserving it in gravy
or fat or by sterilization.

Do not keep a tight cover on a dish, jar or bottle which contains raw
or cooked food, unless the air within is sterile.

Allow cooked food to stand open until it is cool, then put the cover
over two-thirds of its opening or cover with a cheese-cloth or a
colander.

If milk or cream is delivered in bottles, remove the cover immediately
after delivery. If the air where it stands is dusty, protect the milk
with cotton or cheese-cloth. Treat boiled milk in the same manner.

Cooked foods which have poor keeping qualities should not be kept for
further use, or no more should be prepared than can be eaten at one
meal. To this class belong cooked underground or leaf vegetables,
custards, soft puddings, milk and egg foods and gelatines. Damp or
rainy weather is more favorable for decomposition of foodstuffs than
dry weather.

Whites of eggs should not be kept longer than 18 or 24 hours. They
must be preserved in a very cold place and be utilized at the earliest
opportunity. They are like all proteins, more dangerous than starches
if left to ferment, whether the fermentation begins on the pantry shelf
or in the stomach. White of egg can be used in many different ways.
It may be beaten to a froth and served on fruit-soups or fruit pies,
or it can be taken in place of broth at the beginning of a meal. Add
a tablespoon of water and a few drops of lemon or orange or apple or
cranberry juice to one white of an egg and beat up with a fork, or
drink without beating. White of egg can also be utilized for brancakes.

If a variety of left-over food is on hand which cannot be combined into
one dish, it is better to serve different food to each member rather
than to divide each article for all; the latter custom may be more
polite, but it is not wise to mix a great variety of foods at one meal.

Left-over skim-milk is best utilized for cheese, pancakes, whey gruel,
whey or milk sauce, or be boiled and served with stale rye or corn
bread. Vegetables prepared with milk do not make a good combination.
Soft puddings prepared with skim-milk, sugar and eggs, are not very
wholesome unless the necessary amount of fat is added in the form of
butter or suet. Skim-milk and fruit is not a good combination.

Left-over potatoes can be utilized in many different ways: for
fish-cakes, pancakes, hash, potato-dumplings, creamed potatoes or for
salad. Fried cooked potatoes are not a good food for the noon meal,
especially for children or people doing active work.

Baked legumes if preserved with fat meat or oil can be kept on hand for
a week and be rebaked two or three times per week.


PRESERVATION OF EGGS FOR THE WINTER.

Put one layer of common salt or bran one inch deep on the bottom of a
wooden pail or washtub. Then grease the eggs with parafine or oil and
place them with the small end down, so that they will not touch the
bottom of the tub. Fill with enough salt to cover the eggs one inch.


PRESERVATION OF EGGS. No. 2.

Preserve the eggs with salicylic acid, which can be bought in the drug
store. Follow directions on package.


CHILDREN.

A child should have his face and hands washed before and after each
meal. He should not be allowed to carry foodstuffs and candy about the
house, or touch carpets and furniture with sticky and greasy fingers.
If he requires food between meals, give him four or five meals per day,
but have him eat his food in the proper place.

The breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other disease carriers is greatly
favored by allowing children to eat at any and all times without
napkins or special preservation of their dress or without cleaning
their hands before and after eating or before and after playing with
animals and pets.

The American child is given too much consideration at the table. There
is a great difference between the saying “I don’t like a certain food”
and “I don’t want it,” because there are things which taste better.

To leave one’s plate half full of foodstuffs and ask for or accept
another food is fashionable, but before the law of our Creator it is
unclean and disrespectful.

The physiological laws of our bodies are based on very economical
plans; nature utilizes everything and wastes nothing. Cooked
foodstuffs, whether they are wasted within our bodies by
over-indulgence, or in the garbage can, create decomposition and germs.

Cooked green foods and mushes are neither wholesome foods for chickens
or pet animals. Natural food is dry, and animals which are fed on dry
food produce a better quality of milk, eggs and flesh than animals
which are fed upon slops.


DISHWASHING.

Dishwashing is a work which takes up so much time in every household,
that it is a subject which should receive some attention.

The housekeeper who serves a considerable amount of raw food saves much
time and strength by relieving herself of greasy dishes and saucepans.

Scrape off the fragments from plates and utensils and prepare one basin
with hot soapsuds and another with rinsing water of clear hot or cold
water. People whose time is valuable can save much work by placing the
dishes from the drain-board upside down on a shelf prepared from wooden
slats, or set them in a wire basket and let them dry without wiping.

If the dishes are not washed immediately after each meal, place the
silverware and knives in a high bowl or quart measure and let them
soak in hot or cold water. Remove all foods from metallic utensils
immediately after the meal is over. Never allow metallic spoons to
stand in fruit sauce, salt or in any kind of prepared food. Acids
dissolve metal and in this way may produce poisoning.

In contagious diseases all dishes should be sterilized. Burn up all
particles of left-over food, put the dishes into a narrow pail and boil
with plenty of water and soda for an hour or longer.


DISINFECTION OF EXCRETA.

Use solutions of carbolic acid or chloride of lime. Mix with equal
quantities of the excreta and allow it to stand for several hours
before it is disposed of.


WHITEWASH FOR WOODWORK.

Soak one-fourth of a pound of glue in cold water over night. Dissolve
some lime with cold water, add a few handsful of salt. Heat the glue
until it is dissolved and add to one bucket of whitewash. This makes a
smooth and healthy paint. Use for rough or smooth woodwork, twice per
year in laundry, basement or cellar or pantry.




                                 INDEX


PART I.

CHAPTER II.

STUDY OF FOODS.

    Apples, 27

    Almonds, 21

    Asparagus, 19

    Apricots, 26


    Boiled Milk, 35

    Berries, 25

    Blackberries, 26

    Bananas, 27

    Bread, 41

    Brazil Nuts, 21

    Beans (dried), 18

    Beans (green), 18

    Barley, 31


    Cereals, 29

    Cabbage, 19

    Cauliflower, 19

    Celery, 19

    Carrots and Parsnips, 19

    Corn, 20

    Cucumbers, 21

    Chestnuts, 22

    Cherries, 26

    Cranberries, 29

    Compotes or stewed fruits, 28

    Cheese, 32

    Certified Milk, 35

    Cream, 35

    Cocoanuts, 22


    Desserts, 40

    Dates, 29


    Eggs, 32


    Fish, 34

    Fats, 37

    Fruits, 23

    Fruit Jellies, 28

    Figs, 29


    Grapes, 24

    Grapefruit, 27


    Hazelnuts, 22


    Lentils, 18

    Lemons, 27

    Lettuce, 21

    Limes, 27

    Legumes, 18


    Muffins, 41

    Meat, 32

    Muskmelon, 29

    Milk, 34


    Nuts, 24

    Nut-Butter, 22

    Nectarines, 27


    Oats, 31

    Oranges, 27


    Peanuts, 22

    Plums, 28

    Pineapples, 27

    Peaches, 26

    Pears, 26

    Pancakes, 41

    Peas (dried), 18

    Peas (green), 18

    Pine Kernels, 22


    Rice, 31

    Raspberries, 26

    Rye, 30


    Sago, 31

    Soups, 42

    Sugar, 38

    Strawberries, 25

    Spices, 39


    Turnips, 19

    Tapioca, 31

    Tomatoes, 20


    Vegetable Foods, 17


    Wheat, 30

    Watermelons, 29

    Walnuts, 22


PART II.

PREPARATION OF FOODS.

CHAPTER I.

GREEN VEGETABLES.

    Artichokes, 46

    Asparagus, 46


    Beets, 46

    Beet Greens, 46

    Black Carrots, 50


    Carrots, 47

    Celery Roots, 50

    Carrot Puree, 47

    Corn, 52

    Cucumbers (stewed), 50

    Cauliflower, 49

    Cabbage, 52

    Cabbage Rolls, 54


    Egg Plant, 50


    Kale, 53

    Kohlrabi, 52

    Mushrooms, 51

    Mustard Greens, 50

    Mixed Vegetables, 48


    Okra, 50

    Onions, 51


    Peas, 48

    Peas and Codfish, 48

    Peas and Carrots, 48

    Peas with Lamb, 48

    Peppers (stuffed), 51

    Parsley, 51

    Parsnips, 53

    Potatoes, 55

    Potatoes, Creamed, 55

    Potatoes, Sweet, 55

    Potatoes, Steamed, 56

    Potatoes, Mashed, 56

    Potato Salad, 55

    Potato, French, 56

    Potato Balls, 56

    Crust Potatoes, 56

    Potato Pudding, 56

    Potato and Apple Puree, 56


    Sauerkraut, 54

    Squash, 53

    Spinach, 49

    Spinach, Saxon Dish, 50

    String Beans, 49

    Sprouts, 52


    Tomatoes, 53

    Tomatoes, Stewed, 54

    Tomatoes, Stuffed, 54

    Tomato Puree, 53

    Turnips, 53

    Turnip Puree, 53


    Vegetable Oysters, 53


CHAPTER II.

LEGUMES AND MEATS.

    Breaded Goose, 61

    Brains, 61

    Bean and Lentil Puree, 58

    Beans (baked), 57

    Beans, Lima, 58

    Bean Puree, 58

    Baked Lentils or Peas, 57

    Bacon, boiled, 63

    Bacon, fried, 63

    Bacon, fat, 63

    Calves’ Liver, fried, 60

    Calves’ Liver, steamed, 60

    Chipped Beef, 61

    Chicken Gelatine, 59


    Hash, 60

    Ham Hash, 62

    Hamburg Steak, 60


    Kidney Hash, 60


    Leaf Lard, 63

    Lamb in Gelatine, 59


    Meat Cake, 62


    Pork Cutlets, 59

    Pea Puree, 58


    Ribs of Pork with Apple Filling, 63


    Salisbury Steak, 61

    Sour Roast, 59


    Tripe, 60

    Tongue, 61

    Turkey Roasted, 62

    Turkey Stewed, 62

    Turkey in Gelatine, 62

    Turkey Neck, 63

    Turkey Dressing, 63


    Veal Cutlets, 59


CHAPTER III.

FISH, CHEESE AND EGGS.

    Codfish Cakes, 65

    Fish, boiled, 64

    Fish, fried, 64

    Fish Cakes, 65

    Herring, 64

    Shell Fish, 64


    Cottage Cheese, 65


    Eggs, boiled, 65

    Eggs, scrambled, 66

    Eggs, scalloped, 66

    Omelet, 66


CHAPTER IV.

SOUPS.

    Asparagus Soup, 74


    Bean Soup, 67

    Buttermilk Soup, 73

    Buttermilk with Rice, 73

    Blackberry Soup, 69

    Buttermilk Soup, 73

    Beer Soups, 72

    Barley Soups, 74

    Bread Soups, 75

    Bran Soups, 75

    Beef Soup, 69

    Beef Soup, 70


    Carrot Soup, 74

    Clam Chowder, 71

    Clear Soup, 70

    Cream of Bean Soup, 68

    Cream of Pea Soup, 68

    Cream of Tomato Soup, 68

    Cherry Soup, 69


    Huckleberry Soup, 68


    Kidney Soup, 71

    Knorr’s Pea Soup, 72


    Milk Soup, 72

    Milk Soup, 73

    Milk Soup, 73

    Mixed Vegetable Soup, 75


    Oatmeal Soup, 71


    Pigeon Soup, 71

    Potato Soup, 71

    Plum Soup, 69

    Pea Soup, 68


    Spinach Soup, 74

    Soup Stock, 70

    Soups with Caloric Value--


    Tomato Soup, 68

    Vegetable Soup, 70


CHAPTER V.

CEREALS, NOODLES AND DUMPLINGS.

    Almond-Rice, 79

    Apple-Rice, 79

    Apricot-Rice, 79


    Brown Rice, 80

    Bread and Milk, 78

    Barley, 78

    Bran Mush, 76

    Bran and Rye Mush, 77

    Buckwheat Groats, 76

    Boiled Whole Wheat, 77

    Baked Cornmeal Dumplings, 82

    Bread Dumplings, 81


    Cornmeal Mush, 77

    Cherry Rice, 79

    Currant Rice, 80

    Carrot Rice, 80

    Cracker and Milk, 78


    Direction for Boiling Rice, 78

    Dumplings, 81

    Dumplings, 82

    Dumplings, 83


    Macaroni in Cream, 80

    Macaroni in Soup Stock, 80

    Milk-Rice, 78


    Noodles, 80


    Polenta Italian Dish, 77


    Rice Cream, 79

    Rice Flour, 77

    Raw Whole Wheat, 77

    Rylax with Prune Jam, 76

    Rolled Wheat, 76

    Rolled Oats with Cranberry Sauce, 76

    Rhubarb Rice, 80


    Steel Cut Oats, 76


    Tomato-Rice, 80


CHAPTER VI.

BREADS, CAKES AND PUDDINGS.

    Apple Pancakes, 92

    Apple Bread Pudding, 95


    Bran Muffins, 86

    Bran Bread, 86

    Black Bread Pudding, 96

    Baked Bread Pudding, 95

    Boston Brown Bread, 86

    Biscuits, 85

    Bread Omelet, 90

    Buckwheat Cakes, 92


    Cherry Pancakes, 92

    Coffee Cake, 85

    Cereal Omelet, 90

    Corn Bread, 89

    Cornmeal Pudding, 94

    Crusts, 89


    Black Bread, 84


    Doughnuts, 90


    Egg Toast, 91


    Fried Bread, 89

    Fish Pudding, 93

    Flour Bread Pudding, 94

    Frosting, 87

    Fruit Cake, 88


    German Pancakes, 91

    German Potato Cakes, 91


    Hominy Cakes, 90


    Imperial Sticks, 89


    Light Whole Wheat Bread, 84

    Light Graham Bread, 85

    Liver Pudding, 93


    Mixed Flour, 88

    Meat Pudding, 93

    Matzoon Pudding, 93

    Matzoon Cake, 93


    Pop Over, 86

    Pastry, 87

    Plain Cake, 87

    Potato Pudding, 93

    Plum Pancakes, 92

    Plum Pudding, 97

    Plain Bread Pudding, 94

    Pompernickle, 84


    Roman Meal Bread, 85

    Rice Fritters, 91

    Rye Nuts, 88

    Rice Flour Pudding, 95

    Rice Pudding, 94

    Roman Meal Cakes, 92


    Suet Pudding, 96

    Steamed Bread Pudding, 96

    Sago Pudding, 94

    Strawberry Short Cake, 88

    Sand Tart, 87


    Unleavened Pancakes, 91

    Uncle Tom’s Pudding, 96


    Sun Dried Bread, 88

    Snow Balls, 90


    Whole Wheat Bread, 84

    White Bread, 85

    White Muffins, 86


    Vegetable Pudding, 95


CHAPTER VII.

SAUCES AND SALAD DRESSINGS.

    Almond Sauce, 99


    Butter Sauce, 98

    Bacon Sauce, 100


    Cream Sauce, 99

    Caper Sauce, 99

    Cherry Sauce, 100


    Dried Currant Sauce, 100

    Dried Cherry Sauce, 101


    Flavoring of Meatless Sauces, 100


    Horse Radish Sauce, 99


    Lemon Sauce, 100


    Mint Sauce, 100

    Milk Sauce, 100

    Mustard Sauce, 99

    Mushroom Sauce, 99


    Olive Sauce, 99


    Tomato Sauce, 98


    White Wine Sauce, 101

    Red Wine Sauce, 101


COLD DRESSINGS.

    French Dressing, 101


    Mayonnaise Dressing, 101

    Mayonnaise Dressing, 102

    Mayonnaise Dressing, 103


    Syrup Dressing, 103


CHAPTER VIII.

SALADS.

    Anchovy Butter, 105

    Anchovy Salad, 106

    Apple Salad, 107

    Asparagus Salad, 107

    Apple and Banana Salad, 108


    Boiled Vegetable Salad, 104

    Banana Salad, 107

    Banana and Grape Salad, 109

    Beet Salad, 109


    Cereal Salad, 110

    Carrot Salad, 109

    Celery Root Salad, 109

    Cranberry and Pear Salad, 109

    Cranberry and Banana Salad, 108

    Cranberry and Celery Salad, 108

    Celery Salad, 106

    Cabbage Salad, 106

    Cheese Salad, 105

    Cucumber Salad, 104


    Dried Fish Salad, 106

    Dandelion Salad, 106


    Egg Salad, 105

    Empire Salad, 105


    Fish Salad, 104

    Fruit Salad in Gelatine, 108


    Herring Salad, 107

    Yellow Dock Salad, 106


    Lettuce Salad, 104


    Mushroom Salad, 107

    Meat Salad, 103

    Mixed Spinach Salad, 109


    Olive Salad, 107

    Orange Salad, 107


    Pineapple Salad, 108

    Pineapple and Orange Salad, 108


    Radish Salad, 107

    Radish Salad, 109

    Rhubarb Salad, 107

    Raw Corn, 109


    Spinach Salad, 105


    Tomato Salad, 104

    Tomato and Watercress Salad, 104


CHAPTER IX.

GELATINES AND TOASTS.

    Banana Gelatine, 112

    Buckwheat Gelatine, 113

    Bean Gelatine, 115

    Bread Gelatine, 115

    Bran Gelatine, 114

    Barley Gelatine, 113

    Beer Gelatine, 112

    Blanc Mange, 112


    Calves’ Foot Jelly, 112

    Coffee Gelatine, 114

    Cereal Coffee Gelatine, 115

    Chocolate Gelatine, 115


    Fruit Gelatine, 111


    Gelatine Pudding, made with Sour Milk, 111


    Lentil Gelatine, 116


    Oat Gelatine, 114


    Pea Gelatine, 114

    Pineapple Gelatine, 112


    Rice Gelatine, 113

    Rye Gelatine, 114


    Snow Pudding, 113


    Tomato Gelatine, 113


    Wine Gelatine, 115

    Whipped Sweet Cream, 112

    Whipped Sour Milk, 111


TOASTS.

    Apple Toast, 117

    Apricot Toast, 116


    Barley Toast, 116


    Clam Toast, 117

    Celery Toast, 117

    Cream Toast, 117


    Egg Toast, 118


    Milk Toast, 117


    Oyster Toast, 117


    Prune Toast, 116


    Rice Toast, 116

    Rye and Bran Toast, 116


    Spinach Toast, 117


    Tomato Toast, 116


    Water Toast, 116


CHAPTER X.

FRUITS, PUDDINGS AND GRUELS.

    Apple Sauce, 120

    Apple Snow, 121

    Apricot Sauce, 121

    Apple Tapioca, 122

    Ambrosia, 120

    Apple Pudding, 122

    Apple Sago, 125

    Arrowroot Gruel, 127


    Boiled Custard, 124

    Blackberry Sago, 125

    Bread Gruel, 125

    Beer Gruel, 122

    Baked Apples, 120

    Baked Peaches, 120

    Berry Tapioca, 122

    Baked Apples in Oil, 121

    Barley Gruel, 126


    Currant, Raspberry or Peach Pudding, 123

    Cornmeal Gruel, 126

    Codfish Gruel, 126

    Chocolate Cornstarch, 124

    Cornstarch Gruel, 128


    Dried Fruits, 119


    Fig-Butter, 119


    Gluten Gruel, 127

    Gooseberry Pudding, 121

    Gooseberry Compot, 121

    Ground Dried Dates, 120

    Ground Dried Prunes, 120


    Lemon Filling for Pie, 123


    Mixed Flour Gruel, 127

    Milk Gruel, 128


    Nut Gruel, 127


    Onion Gruel, 125

    Oatmeal Gruel, 126


    Peptonized Gruel, 128

    Peaches and Whipped Cream, 123

    Plain Junket, 123


    Rice Gruel, 124

    Raisin and Currant Butter, 119

    Rhubarb Pudding, 122


    Sago Gruel, 128

    Soaked Fruit, 119

    Strawberries with Cream, 123

    Stewed Blackberries, 121

    Stewed Huckleberries, 121


    Tomato Tapioca, 122

    Wine Gruel, 123

    Wine Gruel, 124

    Wheat Gruel, 126


CHAPTER XI.

FLUIDS.

    Apple Barley Water, 133

    Albumen Water, 133

    Almond Milk, 134


    Bean Tea, 136


    Coffee, 135

    Cocoa, 135

    Cocoa Shells, 136


    Egg Wine, 135


    Fruit Lemonade, 134

    Flaxseed Tea, 133


    Irish Moss, 133


    Lemon Whey, 133

    Lemonade with Egg, 134


    Milk Eggnog, 134


    Pea and Lentil Tea, 136


    Raw Green Pea Juice, 133


    Strawberry Milk, 134


    Tea, 135


    Water Eggnog, 133


Quoted from Farmers’ Bulletin No. 142, by W. O. Atwater, Ph. D. U. S.
Department of Agriculture.

TABLE I.--_Average composition of common American food products._

-------------------------------------+--------+-------+---------+-----+---------+-----+----------
                                     |        |       |         |     |         |     |  =Fuel=
  =Food Materials (As Purchased)=    |=Refuse=|=Water=|=Protein=|=Fat=| =Carbohydrates= |=Ash=| =Value=
                                     |        |       |         |     ||     | =per lb.=
-------------------------------------+--------+-------+---------+-----+---------+-----+----------
          =Animal Food.=             |        |       |         |     |         |     |
                                     |   %    |   %   |    %    |  %  |    %    |  %  |=Calories=
Beef, fresh:                         |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Chuck ribs                         |    16.3|  52.6 |  15.5   | 15.0|   --    | 0.8 |     910
  Flank                              |    10.2|  54.0 |  17.0   | 19.0|   --    |  .7 |   1,105
  Loin                               |    13.3|  52.5 |  16.1   | 17.5|   --    |  .9 |   1,025
  Porterhouse steak                  |    12.7|  52.4 |  19.1   | 17.9|   --    |  .8 |   1,100
  Sirloin steak                      |    12.8|  54.0 |  16.5   | 16.1|   --    |  .9 |     975
  Neck                               |    27.6|  45.9 |  14.5   | 11.9|   --    |  .7 |   1,165
  Ribs                               |    20.8|  43.8 |  13.9   | 21.2|   --    |  .7 |   1,135
  Rib rolls                          |   --   |  63.9 |  19.8   | 16.7|   --    |  .9 |   1,055
  Round                              |     7.2|  60.7 |  19.0   | 12.8|   --    | 1.0 |     890
  Rump                               |    20.7|  45.0 |  13.8   | 20.2|   --    |  .7 |   1,090
  Shank, fore                        |    36.9|  42.9 |  12.8   |  7.3|   --    |  .6 |     545
  Shoulder and clod                  |    16.4|  56.8 |  16.4   |  9.8|   --    |  .9 |     715
  Fore quarter                       |    18.7|  49.1 |  14.5   | 17.5|   --    |  .7 |     995
  Hind quarter                       |    15.7|  50.4 |  15.4   | 18.3|   --    |  .7 |   1,045
Beef, corned, canned, pickled,       |        |       |         |     |         |     |
 and dried:                          |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Corned beef                        |     8.4|  49.2 |  14.3   | 23.8|   --    | 4.6 |   1,245
  Tongue, pickled                    |     6.0|  58.9 |  11.9   | 19.2|   --    | 4.3 |   1,010
  Dried, salted, and smoked          |     4.7|  53.7 |  26.4   |  6.9|   --    | 8.9 |     790
  Canned boiled beef                 |   --   |  51.8 |  25.5   | 22.5|   --    | 1.3 |   1,410
  Canned corned beef                 |   --   |  51.8 |  26.3   | 18.7|   --    | 4.0 |   1,270
Veal:                                |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Breast                             |    21.3|  52.0 |  15.4   | 11.0|   --    |  .8 |     745
  Leg                                |    14.2|  60.1 |  15.5   |  7.9|   --    |  .9 |     625
  Leg cutlets                        |     3.4|  68.3 |  20.1   |  7.5|   --    | 1.0 |     695
  Fore quarter                       |    24.5|  54.2 |  15.1   |  6.0|   --    |  .7 |     535
  Hind quarter                       |    20.7|  56.2 |  16.2   |  6.6|   --    |  .8 |     580
Mutton:                              |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Flank                              |     9.9|  39.0 |  13.8   | 36.9|   --    |  .6 |   1,770
  Leg, hind                          |    18.4|  51.2 |  15.1   | 14.7|   --    |  .8 |     890
  Loin chops                         |    16.0|  42.0 |  13.5   | 28.3|   --    |  .7 |   1,415
  Fore quarter                       |    21.2|  41.6 |  12.3   | 24.5|   --    |  .7 |   1,235
  Hind quarter, without tallow       |    17.2|  45.4 |  13.8   | 23.2|   --    |  .7 |   1,210
Lamb:                                |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Breast                             |    19.1|  45.5 |  15.4   | 19.1|   --    |  .8 |   1,075
  Leg, hind                          |    17.4|  52.9 |  15.9   | 13.6|   --    |  .9 |     860
Pork, fresh:                         |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Ham                                |    10.7|  48.0 |  13.5   | 25.9|   --    |  .8 |   1,320
  Loin chops                         |    19.7|  41.8 |  13.4   | 24.2|   --    |  .8 |   1,245
  Shoulder                           |    12.4|  44.9 |  12.0   | 29.8|   --    |  .7 |   1,450
  Tenderloin                         |   --   |  66.5 |  18.9   | 13.0|   --    | 1.0 |     895
Pork, salted, cured, and pickled:    |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Ham, smoked                        |    13.6|  34.8 |  14.2   | 33.4|   --    | 4.2 |   1,635
  Shoulder, smoked                   |    18.2|  36.8 |  13.0   | 26.6|   --    | 5.5 |   1,335
  Salt pork                          |   --   |   7.9 |   1.9   | 86.2|   --    | 3.9 |   3,555
  Bacon, smoked                      |     7.7|  17.4 |   9.1   | 62.2|   --    | 4.1 |   2,715
Sausage:                             |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Bologna                            |     3.3|  55.2 |  18.2   | 19.7|   --    | 3.8 |   1,155
  Pork                               |   --   |  39.8 |  13.0   | 44.2|   1.1   | 2.2 |   2,075
  Frankfort                          |   --   |  57.2 |  19.6   | 18.6|   1.1   | 3.4 |   1,155
Soups:                               |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Celery, cream of                   |   --   |  88.6 |   2.1   |  2.8|   5.0   | 1.5 |     235
  Beef                               |   --   |  92.9 |   4.4   |   .4|   1.1   | 1.2 |     120
  Meat stew                          |   --   |  84.5 |   4.6   |  4.3|   5.5   | 1.1 |     365
  Tomato                             |   --   |  90.0 |   1.8   |  1.1|   5.6   | 1.5 |     185
Poultry:                             |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Chicken, broilers                  |    41.6|  43.7 |  12.8   |  1.4|   --    |  .7 |     305
  Fowls                              |    25.9|  47.1 |  13.7   | 12.3|   --    |  .7 |     765
  Goose                              |    17.6|  38.5 |  13.4   | 29.8|   --    |  .7 |   1,475
  Turkey                             |    22.7|  42.4 |  16.1   | 18.4|   --    |  .8 |   1,060
Fish:                                |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Cod, dressed                       |    29.9|  58.5 |  11.1   |   .2|   --    |  .8 |     220
  Halibut, steaks or sections        |    17.7|  61.9 |  15.3   |  4.4|   --    |  .9 |     475
  Mackerel, whole                    |    44.7|  40.4 |  10.2   |  4.2|   --    |  .7 |     370
  Perch, yellow, dressed             |    35.1|  50.7 |  12.8   |   .7|   --    |  .9 |     275
  Shad, whole                        |    50.1|  35.2 |   9.4   |  4.8|   --    |  .7 |     880
  Shad, roe                          |   --   |  71.2 |  20.9   |  3.8|   2.6   | 1.5 |     600
Fish, preserved:                     |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Cod, salt                          |    24.9|  40.2 |  16.0   |   .4|   --    |18.5 |     325
  Herring, smoked                    |    44.4|  19.2 |  20.5   |  8.8|   --    | 7.4 |     755
Fish, canned:                        |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Salmon                             |   --   |  68.5 |  21.8   | 12.1|   --    | 2.6 |     915
  Sardines                           |  [1]5.0|  53.6 |  23.7   | 12.1|   --    | 5.3 |     950
Shellfish:                           |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Oysters, “solids”                  |   --   |  88.3 |   6.0   |  1.3|   3.3   | 1.1 |     225
  Clams                              |   --   |  80.8 |  10.6   |  1.1|   5.2   | 2.3 |     340
  Crabs                              |    52.4|  36.7 |   7.9   |   .9|    .6   | 1.5 |     200
  Lobsters                           |    61.7|  30.7 |   5.9   |   .7|    .2   |  .8 |     145
Eggs: Hens’ eggs                     | [2]11.2|  65.5 |  13.1   |  9.3|   --    | 0.9 |     685
Dairy products, etc.:                |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Butter                             |   --   |  11.0 |   1.0   | 85.0|   --    | 3.0 |   3,410
  Whole milk                         |   --   |  87.0 |   3.3   |  4.0|   5.0   |  .7 |     310
  Skim milk                          |   --   |  90.5 |   3.4   |   .3|   5.1   |  .7 |     165
  Buttermilk                         |   --   |  91.0 |   3.0   |   .5|   4.8   |  .7 |     160
  Condensed milk                     |   --   |  26.9 |   8.8   |  8.3|  54.1   | 1.9 |   1,480
  Cream                              |   --   |  74.0 |   2.5   | 18.5|   4.5   |  .5 |     865
  Cheese, Cheddar                    |   --   |  27.4 |  27.7   | 36.8|   4.1   | 4.0 |   2,075
  Cheese, full cream                 |   --   |  34.2 |  25.9   | 33.7|   2.7   | 3.8 |   1,885
                                     |        |       |         |     |         |     |
        =Vegetable Food.=            |        |       |         |     |         |     |
                                     |        |       |         |     |         |     |
Flour, meal, etc.:                   |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Entire-wheat flour                 |   --   |  11.4 |  13.8   |  1.9|  71.9   | 1.0 |   1,650
  Graham flour                       |   --   |  11.3 |  13.3   |  2.2|  71.4   | 1.8 |   1,645
  Wheat flour, patent roller process |        |       |         |     |         |     |
    High-grade and medium            |   --   |  12.0 |  11.4   |  1.0|  75.1   |  .5 |   1,635
    Low grade                        |   --   |  12.0 |  14.0   |  1.9|  71.2   |  .9 |   1,640
  Macaroni, vermicelli, etc.:        |   --   |  10.3 |  13.4   |   .9|  74.1   | 1.3 |   1,645
  Wheat breakfast food               |   --   |   9.6 |  12.1   |  1.8|  75.2   | 1.3 |   1,680
  Buckwheat flour                    |   --   |  13.6 |   6.4   |  1.2|  77.9   |  .9 |   1,605
  Rye flour                          |   --   |  12.9 |   6.8   |   .9|  78.7   |  .7 |   1,620
  Corn meal                          |   --   |  12.5 |   9.2   |  1.9|  75.4   | 1.0 |   1,685
  Oat breakfast food                 |   --   |   7.7 |  16.7   |  7.3|  66.2   | 2.1 |   1,800
  Rice                               |   --   |  12.3 |   8.0   |   .3|  79.0   |  .4 |   1,620
  Tapioca                            |   --   |  11.4 |    .4   |   .1|  88.0   |  .1 |   1,650
  Starch                             |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- |  90.0   | --  |   1,675
Bread, pastry, etc.:                 |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  White bread                        |   --   |  35.3 |   9.2   |  1.3|  53.1   | 1.1 |   1,200
  Brown bread                        |   --   |  43.6 |   5.4   |  1.8|  47.1   | 2.1 |   1,040
  Graham bread                       |   --   |  35.7 |   8.9   |  1.8|  52.1   | 1.5 |   1,195
  Whole-wheat bread                  |   --   |  38.4 |   9.7   |   .9|  49.7   | 1.3 |   1,130
  Rye bread                          |   --   |  35.7 |   9.0   |   .6|  53.2   | 1.5 |   1,170
  Cake                               |   --   |  19.9 |   6.3   |  9.0|  63.3   | 1.5 |   1,630
  Cream crackers                     |   --   |   6.8 |   9.7   | 12.1|  69.7   | 1.7 |   1,925
  Oyster crackers                    |   --   |   4.8 |  11.3   | 10.5|  70.5   | 2.9 |   1,910
  Soda crackers                      |   --   |   5.9 |   9.8   |  9.1|  73.1   | 2.1 |   1,875
Sugars, etc.:                        |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Molasses                           |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- |  70.0   | --  |   1,225
  Candy[3]                           |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- |  96.0   | --  |   1,680
  Honey                              |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- |  81.0   | --  |   1,420
  Sugar, granulated                  |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- | 100.0   | --  |   1,750
  Maple sirup                        |   --   |   --  |   --    |  -- |  71.4   | --  |   1,250
Vegetable:[4]                        |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Beans, dried                       |   --   |  12.6 |  22.5   |  1.8|  59.6   | 3.5 |   1,520
  Beans, Lima, shelled               |   --   |  68.5 |   7.1   |   .7|  22.0   | 1.7 |     540
  Beans, string                      |     7.0|  83.0 |   2.1   |   .3|   6.9   |  .7 |     170
  Beets                              |    20.0|  70.0 |   1.3   |   .1|   7.7   |  .9 |     160
  Cabbage                            |    15.0|  77.7 |   1.4   |   .2|   4.8   |  .9 |     115
  Celery                             |    20.0|  75.6 |    .9   |   .1|   2.6   |  .8 |      65
  Corn, green (sweet) edible portion |   --   |  75.4 |   3.1   |  1.1|  19.7   |  .7 |     440
  Cucumbers                          |    15.0|  81.1 |    .7   |   .2|   2.6   |  .4 |      65
  Lettuce                            |    15.0|  80.5 |   1.0   |   .2|   2.5   |  .8 |      65
  Mushrooms                          |   --   |  88.1 |   3.5   |   .4|   6.8   | 1.2 |     185
  Onions                             |    10.0|  79.8 |   1.4   |   .3|   8.9   |  .5 |     190
  Parsnips                           |    20.0|  66.4 |   1.3   |   .4|  10.8   | 1.1 |     230
  Peas (Pisum sativum), dried        |   --   |   9.5 |  24.6   |  1.0|  62.0   | 2.9 |   1,565
  Peas (Pisum sativum), shelled      |   --   |  74.6 |   7.0   |   .5|  16.9   | 1.0 |     440
  Cowpeas, dried                     |   --   |  13.0 |  21.4   |  1.4|  60.8   | 3.4 |   1,505
  Potatoes                           |    20.0|  62.6 |   1.8   |   .1|  14.7   |  .8 |     295
  Rhubarb                            |    40.0|  56.6 |    .4   |   .4|   2.2   |  .4 |      60
  Sweet potatoes                     |    20.0|  55.2 |   1.4   |   .6|  21.9   |  .9 |     440
  Spinach                            |   --   |  92.3 |   2.1   |   .3|   3.2   | 2.1 |      95
  Squash                             |    50.0|  44.2 |    .7   |   .2|   4.5   |  .4 |     100
  Tomatoes                           |   --   |  94.3 |    .9   |   .4|   3.9   |  .5 |     100
  Turnips                            |    30.0|  62.7 |    .9   |   .1|   5.7   |  .6 |     120
Vegetables, canned:                  |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Baked beans                        |   --   |  68.9 |   6.9   |  2.5|  19.6   | 2.1 |     555
  Peas (Pisum sativum), green        |   --   |  85.3 |   3.6   |   .2|   9.8   | 1.1 |     235
  Corn, green                        |   --   |  76.1 |   2.8   |  1.2|  19.0   |  .9 |     430
  Succotash                          |   --   |  75.9 |   3.6   |  1.0|  18.6   |  .9 |     425
  Tomatoes                           |   --   |  94.0 |   1.2   |   .2|   4.0   |  .6 |      95
Fruits, berries, etc., fresh:[5]     |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Apples                             |    25.0|  63.3 |   0.3   |  0.3|  10.8   | 0.3 |     190
  Bananas                            |    35.0|  48.9 |    .8   |   .4|  14.3   |  .6 |     260
  Grapes                             |    25.0|  58.0 |   1.0   |  1.2|  14.4   |  .4 |     295
  Lemons                             |    30.0|  62.5 |    .7   |   .5|   5.9   |  .4 |     125
  Muskmelons                         |    50.0|  44.8 |    .3   |  -- |   4.6   |  .3 |      80
  Oranges                            |    27.0|  63.4 |    .6   |   .1|   8.5   |  .4 |     150
  Pears                              |    10.0|  76.0 |    .5   |   .4|  12.7   |  .4 |     230
  Persimmons, edible portion         |   --   |  66.1 |    .8   |   .7|  31.5   |  .9 |     550
  Raspberries                        |   --   |  85.8 |   1.0   |  -- |  12.6   |  .6 |     220
  Strawberries                       |     5.0|  85.9 |    .9   |   .6|   7.0   |  .6 |     150
  Watermelons                        |    59.4|  37.5 |    .2   |   .1|   2.7   |  .1 |      50
Fruits, dried:                       |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Apples                             |   --   |  28.1 |   1.6   |  2.2|  66.1   | 2.0 |   1,185
  Apricots                           |   --   |  29.4 |   4.7   |  1.0|  62.5   | 2.4 |   1,125
  Dates                              |    10.0|  13.8 |   1.9   |  2.5|  70.6   | 1.2 |   1,275
  Figs                               |   --   |  18.8 |   4.3   |   .3|  74.2   | 2.4 |   1,280
  Raisins                            |    10.0|  13.1 |   2.3   |  3.0|  68.5   | 3.1 |   1,265
Nuts:                                |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Almonds                            |    45.0|   2.7 |  11.5   | 30.2|   9.5   | 1.1 |   1,515
  Brazil nuts                        |    49.6|   2.6 |   8.6   | 33.7|   3.5   | 2.0 |   1,485
  Butternuts                         |    86.4|    .6 |   3.8   |  8.3|    .5   |  .4 |     385
  Chestnuts, fresh                   |    16.0|  37.8 |   5.2   |  4.5|  35.4   | 1.1 |     915
  Chestnuts, dried                   |    24.0|   4.5 |   8.1   |  5.3|  56.4   | 1.7 |   1,385
  Cocoanuts                          |[6]148.8|   7.2 |   2.9   | 25.9|  14.3   |  .9 |   1,295
  Cocoanuts, prepared                |   --   |   3.5 |   6.3   | 57.4|  31.5   | 1.3 |   2,865
  Filberts                           |    52.1|   1.8 |   7.5   | 31.3|   6.2   | 1.1 |   1,430
  Hickory nuts                       |    62.2|   1.4 |   5.8   | 25.5|   4.3   |  .8 |   1,145
  Pecans, polished                   |    53.2|   1.4 |   5.2   | 33.3|   6.2   |  .7 |   1,465
  Peanuts                            |    24.5|   6.9 |  19.5   | 29.1|  18.5   | 1.5 |   1,775
  Pinon (Pinus edulis)               |    40.6|   2.0 |   8.7   | 36.8|  10.2   | 1.7 |   1,730
  Walnuts, black                     |    74.1|    .6 |   7.2   | 14.6|   3.0   |  .5 |     730
  Walnuts, English                   |    58.1|   1.0 |   6.9   | 26.6|   6.8   |  .6 |   1,250
Miscellaneous:                       |        |       |         |     |         |     |
  Chocolate                          |   --   |   5.9 |  12.9   | 48.7|  30.3   | 2.2 |   2,625
  Cocoa, powdered                    |   --   |   4.6 |  21.6   | 28.9|  37.7   | 7.2 |   2,160
  Cereal coffee infusion (1 part     |        |       |         |     |         |     |
    boiled in 20 parts water)[7]     |   --   |  98.2 |    .2   |  -- |   1.4   |  .2 |      30

[1] Refuse, oil.

[2] Refuse, shell.

[3] Plain confectionery not containing nuts, fruit, or chocolate.

[4] Such vegetables as potatoes, squash, beets, etc., have a certain
amount of inedible material, skin, seeds, etc. The amount varies with
the method of preparing the vegetables, and cannot be accurately
estimated. The figures given for refuse of vegetables, fruits, etc.,
are assumed to represent approximately the amount of refuse in these
foods as ordinarily prepared.

[5] Fruits contain a certain proportion of inedible materials, as
skins, seeds, etc., which are properly classed as refuse. In some
fruits, as oranges and prunes, the amount rejected in eating is
practically the same as refuse. In others, as apples and pears, more or
less of the edible material is ordinarily rejected with the skin and
seeds and other inedible portions. The edible material which is thus
thrown away, and should properly be classed with the waste, is here
classed with the refuse. The figures for refuse here given represent,
as nearly as can be ascertained, the quantities ordinarily rejected.

[6] Milk and shell.

[7] The average of five analyses of cereal coffee grain is: Water
6.2, protein 13.3, fat 3.4, carbohydrates 72.6, and ash 4.5 per cent.
Only a portion of the nutrients, however, enter into the infusion.
The average in the table represents the available nutrients in the
beverage. Infusions of genuine coffee and of tea like the above contain
practically no nutrients.



TABLE II.--_Food consumption of persons in different circumstances, and
proposed dietary standards._

(Quantities per man per day.)

------------------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+------+----------
                                =No. of=    |    =Actually Eaten=     |     =Digestible=        |      |
                                =Studies=   |---------+-----+-------+---------+-----+-------+ =Fuel= |=Nutritive=
                            =Incl. in Av’ge=| =Protein= | =Fat= | =Carbohydrates= | =Protein= | =Fat= | =Carbohydrates= | Value=|  Ratio=
------------------------------------------+---------+-----+-------+---------+-----+-------+------+----------
    =Persons with Active Work.=      |    |  =gms=  |=gms=| =gms= |  =gms=  |=gms=| =gms= |=Calories= | _I_:
Rowing clubs in New England          |  7 |   155   | 177 |  440  |   143   | 168 |  427  | 3,955|   5.6
Bicyclists in New York               |  3 |   186   | 186 |  651  |   171   | 177 |  631  | 5,005|   6
Football teams in Connecticut and    |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  California                         |  2 |   226   | 354 |  634  |   208   | 336 |  615  | 6,590|   6.6
Prussian machinists                  |  1 |   139   | 113 |  677  |   128   | 107 |  657  | 4,270|   7
Swedish mechanics                    |  5 |   189   | 110 |  714  |   174   | 104 |  693  | 4,590|   5.3
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
   =Persons with Ordinary Work.=     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Farmers’ families in Eastern United  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  States                             | 10 |    97   | 130 |  467  |    89   | 124 |  453  | 3,415|   8.2
Mechanics’ families in United States | 14 |   103   | 150 |  402  |    95   | 143 |  390  | 3,355|   7.5
Laborers’ families in large cities   |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  of United States                   | 12 |   101   | 116 |  344  |    93   | 110 |  834  | 2,810|   6.3
Laborers’ families in United States  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  (more comfortable circumstances)   |  2 |   120   | 147 |  534  |   110   | 140 |  518  | 8,925|   7.6
Russian peasants                     | -- |   129   |  33 |  589  |   119   |  31 |  571  | 3,165|   5.4
Swedish mechanics                    |  6 |   134   |  79 |  523  |   123   |  75 |  507  | 3,380|   5.5
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
       =Professional Men.=           |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Lawyers, teachers, etc., in United   |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  States                             | 14 |   104   | 125 |  423  |    96   | 119 |  410  | 3,220|   7.1
College clubs in United States       | 15 |   107   | 148 |  459  |    98   | 141 |  445  | 3,580|   7.8
German physicians                    |  2 |   131   |  95 |  327  |   121   |  90 |  317  | 2,680|   4.3
Japanese professor                   |  1 |   123   |  21 |  416  |   113   |  19 |  403  | 2,345|   4
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  =Men with Little or no Exercise.=  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Men (American) in respiration        |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  calorimeter                        | 11 |   112   |  80 |  305  |   103   |  76 |  296  | 2,380|   4.5
Men (German) in respiration          |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  apparatus                          |  5 |   127   |  80 |  302  |   117   |  76 |  293  | 2,430|   4
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
=Persons in Destitute Circumstances.=|    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Poor families in New York City       | 11 |    93   |  95 |  407  |    86   |  90 |  895  | 2,845|   6.9
Laborers’ families in Pittsburg, Pa. |  2 |    80   |  95 |  308  |    74   |  90 |  299  | 2,400|   6.8
German Laborer’s family              |  1 |    52   |  32 |  287  |    48   |  30 |  278  | 1,640|   7.2
Italian mechanics                    |  5 |    76   |  38 |  396  |    70   |  36 |  384  | 2,225|   6.6
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
        =Miscellaneous.=             |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Negro families in Alabama and        |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  Virginia                           | 39 |    86   | 145 |  440  |    79   | 188 |  427  | 3,895|   9.3
Italian families in Chicago          |  4 |   103   | 111 |  391  |    95   | 105 |  379  | 2,965|   6.5
French Canadians in Chicago          |  5 |   118   | 158 |  345  |   109   | 150 |  335  | 3,260|   6.2
Bohemian families in Chicago         |  8 |   115   | 101 |  360  |   106   |  96 | 3499  | 2,800|   5.3
Inhabitants Java village, Columbian  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  Exposition, 1893                   |  1 |    66   |  19 |  254  |    61   |  18 |  246  | 1,450|   4.7
Russian Jews in Chicago              | 10 |   137   | 103 |  418  |   126   |  98 |  405  | 3,135|   5
Mexican families in New Mexico       |  4 |    94   |  71 |  613  |    86   |  67 |  595  | 3,460|   8.7
Chinese dentist in California        |  1 |   115   | 113 |  289  |   106   | 107 |  280  | 2,620|   4.9
Chinese laundryman in California     |  1 |   135   |  76 |  566  |   124   |  72 |  549  | 3,480|   5.7
Chinese farm laborer in California   |  1 |   144   |  95 |  640  |   132   |  90 |  621  | 3,980|   6.2
United States Army ration, peace     | -- |   120   | 161 |  454  |   110   | 153 |  440  | 3,730|   7.1
German Army ration, peace            | -- |   114   |  39 |  480  |   105   |  37 |  466  | 2,275|   5.2
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
      =Dietary Standards.=           |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
                                     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
Man at hard work (Voit)              | -- |   145   | 100 |  450  |   133   |  95 |  437  | 3,270|   4.9
Man at moderate work (Voit)          | -- |   118   |  56 |  500  |   109   |  53 |  485  | 2,965|   5.5
Man with very hard muscular work     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  (Atwater)                          | -- |   175   | [8] |  [8]  |   161   | [8] |  [8]  | 5,500|   7.2
Man with hard muscular work (Atwater)| -- |   150   | [8] |  [8]  |   138   | [8] |  [8]  | 4,150|   6.2
Man with moderately active muscular  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  work (Atwater)                     | -- |   125   | [8] |  [8]  |   115   | [8] |  [8]  | 3,400|   6.2
Man with light to moderate muscular  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  work (Atwater)                     | -- |   112   | [8] |  [8]  |   103   | [8] |  [8]  | 3,050|   6.1
Man at “sedentary” or woman with     |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  moderately active work (Atwater)   | -- |   100   | [8] |  [8]  |    92   | [8] |  [8]  | 2,700|   6.1
Woman at light to moderate muscular  |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  work, or man without muscular      |    |         |     |       |         |     |       |      |
  exercise (Atwater)                 | -- |    90   | [8] |  [8]  |    83   | [8] |  [8]  | 2,450|   6.1

[8] Fats and carbohydrates in sufficient amounts to furnish, together
with the protein, the indicated amount of energy.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 75850 ***
