*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 55817 ***

Transcriber's Notes:

  Underscores "_" before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Equal signs "=" before and after a word or phrase indicate =bold=
    in the original text.
  Carat symbol "^" designates a superscript.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Old or antiquated spellings have been preserved.
  Typographical errors have been silently corrected but other variations
    in spelling and punctuation remain unaltered.

[Illustration]

                      PRIVATELY PRINTED OPUSCULA.

                    _ISSUED TO MEMBERS OF THE SETTE
                            OF ODD VOLUMES_.

                               No. XXIX.

                         AUTOMATA OLD AND NEW.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: [_See page 54_.]




                          Automata Old and New

                                   BY
                   CONRAD WILLIAM COOKE, M.INST.E.E.

                      _Mechanick_ to the Sette of
                              Odd Volumes

[Illustration]

             _Delivered at a Meeting of the Sette held at
                       Limmer’s Hotel, on Friday,
                           November 6th_, 1891

[Illustration]

                                 LONDON
                    IMPRINTED AT THE CHISWICK PRESS
                               MDCCCXCIII

                           TO THEIR ODDSHIPS
                         CHARLES HOLME, F.L.S.
                              (_Pilgrim_),
                            PRESIDENT, 1890.

                  GEORGE CHARLES HAITÉ, R.B.A., F.L.S.
                            (_Art Critic_),
                            PRESIDENT, 1891.

                                  AND

                         WILLIAM MURRELL, M.D.
                               (_Leech_),
                            PRESIDENT, 1892.

                      DURING WHOSE YEARS OF OFFICE
                         THE FOLLOWING NOTES ON
                                AUTOMATA
                           WERE RESPECTIVELY
                    PREPARED, PRESENTED AND PRINTED,
                            THIS LITTLE BOOK
                            IS DEDICATED BY
                                    CONRAD W. COOKE,
                _Mechanick to ye Sette of Odd Volumes_.

[Illustration]

               _This edition is limited to 255 copies, and
               is imprinted for private circulation only._

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




AUTOMATA OLD AND NEW.


May it please your Oddship, Brethren and Guests of Y^e Sette of Odd
Volumes. The origin of this little paper is very simple. Just eleven
months ago we had the delight of listening to the very interesting and
instructive communication upon the work of that wonderful mechanical
genius, electrician, and _prestidigitateur_, Robert-Houdin, presented
to us by my very good friend, our revered Seer, Brother Manning. With
the object of contributing something to the discussion which followed
that paper, I began to make a few notes upon Automata, with which
subject the name of Robert-Houdin must for ever be associated; I soon
found, however, that the subject was so comprehensive and went back
into such remote periods of antiquity, that to do it even the most
scanty justice would require a paper devoted to itself alone; and, as
our esteemed Pilgrim and Past-President, Brother Holme, was at that
time pressing me for a paper with that persistency and importunity
which characterized his presidentship and gave it so much of its
success, I, as a loyal Odd Volume, felt bound to obey the mandate of
his Oddship; and, holding the honourable office of _Mechanick_ to the
Sette, I have chosen “Automata Old and New” for the subject of this
communication.

The word Automaton would in its strictest and most comprehensive sense
include all apparently self-moving machines or devices which contain
within themselves their own motive power, and in this sense such
machines as clocks and watches, and even locomotives and steamships
might be included. I shall, however, throughout this paper limit
myself to the more restricted and more ordinarily accepted meaning of
the term, namely, such self-moving machines as are made either in the
forms of men or of animals, or by which animal motions and functions
are more or less imitated.

As mechanics, next to mathematics and astronomy, is the most ancient
of sciences, and as the scientific knowledge of the ancients was ever
shrouded in mystery to conceal it from the eyes of the vulgar, and to
confer upon the initiated power and profit by working on the credulity
of the ignorant, it was but only to be expected that mechanical
science should be early applied in the ancient mysteries by which the
philosophers and the priests of antiquity maintained so much of their
supremacy.

One of the very earliest allusions to mysterious self-moving machines
is to be found in the eighteenth book of the “Iliad,” wherein we are
told of Vulcan that

    “Full twenty tripods for his hall he fram’d,
    That, placed on living wheels of massy gold
    (Wondrous to tell) instinct with spirit roll’d
    From place to place, around the bless’d abodes,
    Self-mov’d, obedient to the beck of gods.”[1]

Several others of the ancient poets besides Homer have sung about
the wonderful mechanical devices of Vulcan, among which were golden
statues, the semblances of living maids, which not only appeared to be
endued with life, but which walked by his side and bore him up as he
walked. Aristotle also refers to self-moving tripods, and Philostratus
states that Appolonius of Tyana saw similar pieces of mechanism among
the Brahmins of India; but this must have been nearly four hundred
years after Aristotle wrote, and some nine hundred years after the time
of Homer.

Then again we hear of Dædalus making self-moving statues, small figures
of the gods, of which Plato in his “Menos” says that unless they were
fastened they would of themselves run away, and he puts this into the
mouth of Socrates, who uses it as a figure to illustrate the importance
of not only acquiring but of holding fast scientific truth that it may
not fly away from us. Aristotle in referring to these statues affirms
that Dædalus accomplished his object by putting into them quicksilver,
but the learned mechanician Bishop Wilkins points out that “this would
have been too grosse a way for so excellent an artificer; it is more
likely that he did it with wheels and weights.”[2] We are moreover told
by Macrobius[3] that in the temple of Hieropolis at Antium there were
moving statues.

A contemporary of Plato and, it is said, his master, was Archytas
of Tarentum, the celebrated Pythagorean philosopher, mathematician,
cosmographer, and mechanician, to whom is accredited the invention
of the screw and of the crane. Archytas is said to have constructed
of wood a pigeon that could fly about, but which could not rise again
after it had settled; and Aulus Gellius (who lived in the reigns of
Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius), tells us in
his “Noctes Atticæ,” that “many men of eminence among the Greeks, and
Favonius, the philosopher, a most vigilant searcher into antiquity,
have in a most positive manner assured us that the model of a pigeon,
formed in wood by Archytas, was so contrived as by a certain mechanical
art and power to fly; so nicely was it balanced by weights and put
in motion by hidden and inclosed air. In a matter so very improbable
we may be allowed to add the words of Favonius himself: ‘Archytas of
Tarentum, being both a philosopher and skilled in mechanics, made a
wooden pigeon which had it ever settled would not have risen again till
now.’”[4] And I am bound to admit that in this point I agree with him.

From the above description it would appear that a still greater
invention than a flying automaton was made by Archytas, for in an
apparatus “_so nicely balanced by weights and put in motion by hidden
and inclosed air_,” we have a very fair forecast of the modern aërostat
or balloon, filled with gas and balanced by ballast. There cannot be
any doubt but that the accounts of these very early machines (if such
ever existed at all), have been greatly exaggerated during the process
of being handed down through long ages of ignorance and credulity; but
we may now enter upon surer ground although still very ancient. In the
reign of Ptolemy Euergetes II. (Ptolemy VII.), about 150 years B.C.,
there lived at Alexandria that great genius of mechanical science,
Hero; and his remarkable book “Spiritalia,” of which I am able to show
you several copies to-night, is itself a great storehouse of ingenuity
in the construction of automata of very various forms and principles.
This remarkable man was, if not the inventor, the first describer
of the siphon in both its typical forms, the syringe, the well-known
portable shower-bath, the clack valve, the fire engine, even with that
mechanical refinement, an air vessel for insuring a continuous stream,
a self-trimming lamp, the steam blowpipe, the pneumatic fountain
called after his name, a steam engine, and last if not least, the
penny-in-the-slot automatic machine for obtaining a drink, or, may be,
a charge of scent.

I propose now to show you on the screen some photographic reproductions
of pages in his book, some taken from the Latin edition of Commandinus,
published at Urbino in 1575, and some from the Italian edition of
Alessandro Georgi, printed at the same place in 1592, some from the
fine edition of Aleotti, published in 1589, and others from the
Amsterdam version of 1680, all of which editions I am able to show you.
I have, moreover, copied some from manuscripts in the British Museum,
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, of which there are four in
the National Library, _i.e._, two in the Harley Collection and two
among the Burney manuscripts.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The first illustration I shall show you from Hero’s work is a bird
which, by means of a stream of water, is caused to pipe or sing. This
little automaton consists of a pedestal (A B C D) (Fig. 1), which is in
reality a water-tight tank fitted with a funnel (E), the stem of which
reaches nearly to the bottom; to the right of this there is a little
bush on which sits a bird, and a tube (G H) leads up from the roof of
the tank and terminates in a little whistle, the end of which dips into
a cup (L) containing water. When water is poured into the funnel, the
air in the tank is driven out through the tube and whistle (G H) and,
bubbling through the water, sounds as if the bird were singing. Thus
the well-known bubbling bird-whistle dates back to a century and a half
before the Christian era or earlier.

The next illustration (Fig. 2) shows a more elaborate arrangement, in
which there are four small birds being watched by an owl; the moment
the owl’s back is turned the birds begin to sing, but cease as soon as
he turns towards them. In this apparatus the birds are made to sing
in precisely the same way as in the last illustration, namely, by the
displacement by water of the air in the tank, but as soon as the level
of the water in the tank reaches the top of a concentric siphon (F G)
the water is discharged into a bucket, the birds cease to sing, and
the bucket, owing to its increased weight, lifts the counterbalance
weight (Z), and in doing so turns the spindle (P M) which supports the
owl (R S). When the bucket is full its contents are discharged by a
small siphon within it and it is drawn up by the weight (Z) the owl
turns its back to the birds, and the cycle of operations is repeated.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

In the next figure a still more elaborate effect is produced. Here is a
pedestal upon which are four little bushes each having a bird sitting
in its branches; when water is allowed to flow into the funnel the
first bird begins to whistle, and after a few minutes leaves off, when
the next bird begins, and when he has finished the third bird sings,
after a little time the fourth takes up the song, and when he has
finished the first begins again, and so on as long as water is flowing
into the funnel. These effects are produced in the simplest possible
manner, by a combination of as many superposed tanks as there are birds
to sing, the one emptying into the other by siphons. The illustration
explains itself.

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

In the next device (Fig. 4) we have a bird whose singing is
_intermittent_. In this case the water flows into a little cup which
topples over the moment it is full, emptying itself into the funnel and
immediately righting itself (being loaded at its bottom), the sound is
produced by the displaced air escaping through a whistle in the manner
already described.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

We now come to a different class, in which heat is employed for
obtaining an increase of air pressure whereby certain automatic
actions are produced. Here we have a priest and priestess officiating
at an altar; and the effect of lighting the fire thereon is to cause
the two figures to pour libations onto the sacrifice. In this case
the altar consists of an air-tight metallic box in communication,
by means of a central tube, with a larger box forming the pedestal.
Into this lower reservoir is poured the wine or other liquid through
the hole marked M. When the fire is lighted the air in the altar is
expanded, and pressing on the surface of the liquid in the pedestal,
forces some of it through the tubes which pass through the body and
down the right arm of each figure. In the next view (Fig. 6) we see
how this principle was employed by Hero for the opening of the doors
of a temple, the tradition being that when a sacrifice was offered on
her altar the goddess Isis showed her invisible presence by throwing
open the doors of her sanctuary. In this case the altar consists of an
air-tight metallic box communicating by means of a tube (F G) with a
spherical vessel (H) partly filled with water. When the altar becomes
hot the contained air is expanded, thereby increasing the pressure on
the surface of the water, some of which is therefore forced through
the bent tube (L) into the bucket (M), which descends by its increased
weight, thereby unwinding the cords from the two spindles that perform
the function of hinges to the temple doors, at the same time winding
up the counterweight (R) on the left. When the fire goes out the
altar cools, assuming its ordinary atmospheric pressure, and the water
in the bucket is forced back into the vessel (H), and the weight
counterbalancing the empty bucket, closes again the doors.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

Like many other geniuses who have lived before their time, Hero had his
plagiarists, his devices having been adopted and described by later
writers without one word of acknowledgment as to their authorship. From
the middle to the end of the seventeenth century several books appeared
which to a great extent were simply bad and erroneous copies of Hero’s
inventions, and not even intelligently copied. Here for instance (Fig.
7) is a _facsimile_ of an illustration in a curious old book, “The
Mysteries of Nature and Art,” by John Bate, published in 1635; this
is poor Bate’s attempt to steal Hero’s device for the temple doors,
showing an altogether impossible scheme. In the first place the doors
could not open at all, for the ropes are so coiled as to neutralize
each other’s action, and, secondly, the counterweight to the right has
its cord simply looped round the spindle and therefore is absolutely
useless; the accompanying description is even more absurd, for it
explains the action of the apparatus as follows: “The fier on the Altar
will cause the water to distill out of the Ball into the Bucket, which
when (by reason of the water) it is become heavier than the waight, it
will draw it up and so open the sayd gates or little doores.”

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

Again, in one of Hero’s illustrations a revolving disc carrying little
figures was made to rotate upon the reaction principle of his own
Æolipile, or steam engine. By a little bit of bad perspective the ends
of the cross tubes were shown as turning alternately up and down, and
Bate not only repeats this error, but goes out of his way to point out
that “in the middest” there must be “a hollow pipe spreading itself
into foure severall branches at the bottom: _the ends of two of the
branches must turn up and the ends of two must turn down_,” thus making
any rotative action impossible.

But Bate was not the only pirate of Hero’s work; a few years after Bate
had written, that is, in 1659, there appeared another curious book by
Isaak de Caus, upon Water Works,[5] and in that book we find our old
friend the owl keeping the small birds in order, the only difference
being that this is a more indulgent owl, or perhaps he is a teacher of
singing, for in this case the birds sing while he is looking at them
and cease the moment he turns his back.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

Another pretty conceit of Hero’s is shown in Fig. 8, in which there is
a bird which not only makes a noise but at certain times will drink any
liquid which is presented to it. The flow of water being intermittent,
the cistern forming the pedestal is alternately filled and emptied.
While it is being filled the air escapes through a whistle and causes
the bird to sing, and when it is being emptied, by means of a siphon,
a partial vacuum is produced and liquid presented to it is drawn up
through the beak.

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

The next automaton from Hero is very ingenious and interesting, because
it combines hydraulic, pneumatic, and mechanical actions. Here (Fig.
9) is a figure of Hercules armed with a bow and arrow; there is also
a dragon under an apple tree, from which an apple has fallen to the
ground. Upon the apple being lifted, Hercules discharges the arrow
at the dragon, which begins to hiss and continues to do so for some
minutes. In this apparatus there is a double tank having a connection
by a valve (H), which is attached by a cord to the apple (K), another
cord, passing over a pulley, connects the apple with a trigger in
the right hand of Hercules. Upon lifting the apple the trigger is
released, and at the same time the valve is opened, allowing the water
in the upper tank to flow into the lower, by which means air is forced
through a tube (Z) into the dragon’s mouth, producing a hissing sound,
and this will continue until the upper tank is empty. Here (Fig. 10) is
Bate’s version of the same device, but very inferior to that from which
it was taken.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

The next photograph is taken from another work of Hero’s, “_Quatro
theoremi aggiunti a gli artifitiosi spiriti_,” a copy of which I have
here (Fig. 11), and which was printed at Ferrara in 1589.

[Illustration: Fig. 11.]

This figure illustrates a very elaborate automaton, representing one
of Vulcan’s workshops in which you will see a smith forging a piece of
iron, and assisted by three hammermen. The smith first puts his iron
in the fire and then lays it on the anvil when the hammermen begin
to hammer it; then they leave off, and the smith turns round again
to the fire. All these effects are produced by the machinery below
the floor, and shown in the illustration. A shaft (A B) is driven by
means of a water-wheel on the right, and on this shaft are projections
or cambs which, by striking the ends of three levers (T, X, and V),
pull the chains by which the arms of the hammermen are lifted. While
this is going on the bucket (marked 20) is slowly filling, and when
a sufficient weight of water has accumulated in it, it lifts the
counterweight (17), and, in doing so, rotates the vertical shaft to
which the figure of the smith is attached, turning him round to the
fire, and at the same time, by swinging round the conduit pipe (H I),
cuts off the water from the wheel, and the hammermen cease to work
until the smith is again ready for them. I think you will agree with me
that this machine offers very fair evidence of the mechanical ingenuity
of a man who flourished more than 2,000 years ago.

The last automaton of Hero to which I shall refer is perhaps the most
ingenious of all, and it is one that those who were present when
Brother Manning gave us his discourse on Robert-Houdin have already
seen, I mean the little figure whose head cannot be severed from his
body no matter how many times a knife be passed through his neck.
Thanks to the kindness of my good friend I can show you one of these
beautiful figures presented to me by him, and it will, I think, be
of interest to him and to you to know that this device was invented
nearly 2,000 years before Robert-Houdin was born, and a description
of it with accompanying figures may be seen to-day in the British
Museum in a Greek manuscript of the fifteenth century, which is a copy
of Hero’s Σπειριταλια, and I now throw on the screen a carefully made
facsimile (Fig. 12) of the figure given in that manuscript (which is
known as No. 5605 of the Harleian Collection).

[Illustration:-HARLEIAN MANUSCRIPT-(FIFTEENTH CENTURY)-Fig. 12.]

The head of this figure, which is otherwise separate from it, is
attached to it by a peculiar shaped wheel pivotted between the
shoulders of the body. This wheel may be described as a circular
disc having an expanded rim so that a section taken through a radius
would be of the form of the letter =T=, out of this wheel three
nearly semicircular gaps are cut, each occupying sixty degrees of the
circumference, and therefore leaving three portions of the rim, each
also of sixty degrees. The neck attached to the head is fitted with a
hollow =T= shaped circular groove into which the =T= ended arms of
the wheel pass in succession as the wheel is rotated. As the groove in
the head occupies nearly sixty degrees it follows that as the wheel
is rotated the rim of one arm can never leave the groove before the
rim of the following arm has entered it, and so the head is attached
to the body in every position of the wheel. When the knife is passed
between the head and the body it strikes against one of the spokes of
the wheel, moving it forward and pushing one of the arms out of the
groove in the head, while, at the same time, another, following behind
the knife, takes its place, and thus the head can never be detached
from the body. Such an automaton is the little negro which I hold
in my hand, for which I am indebted to the fraternal generosity of
Brother Manning. Hero’s description, however, carries the ingenuity of
the device considerably farther, for in his automaton, not only is it
impossible to sever the head from the body by passing a knife through
the neck, but the figure can actually drink both before and after the
operation. The illustration on the screen (Fig. 13) is a sort of modern
restoration of the Harley drawing, showing the disposition of the
various parts of the mechanism. (A) represents the wheel by which the
head is held on to the body, and it will be noticed that a tube D D
leads from the mouth to the neck and another, E, from the neck through
the body; these two tubes, marked respectively D D and E, are connected
by the sliding tube F, which is attached to the two racks F and G,
into which are geared the two toothed wheels B and C. When the knife
is passed from P to O it first rotates the holding-on wheel A, and then
strikes against the radial face of the wheel C, turning it through
a small arc, thereby moving the racks, and, sliding the connecting
tube F out of D, allowing the knife to pass, which next strikes the
radial face of the wheel B, and, by turning it, restores the sliding
connecting tube F into D, and thus recompletes the connection. The
sucking-up the liquid being accomplished in a similar manner to that in
the drinking bird already described.[6]

[Illustration: Fig. 13.]

I have now done with Hero of Alexandria, but, before passing to another
period, I cannot resist showing you an invention of his which although
not an automaton is too interesting in the light of modern civilization
to omit. This (Fig. 14) is Hero’s automatic penny-in-the-slot machine
for giving a drink in exchange for a coin. If a “coin of five
drachmas” be dropped into the slot it falls on a little plate at the
end of a lever thereby opening a valve and allowing the liquid to
escape through the nozzle.

[Illustration: Fig. 14.]

It is more than probable that Hero was not himself the inventor of all
the devices he describes, it is possible that many are due to Ctesibius
whose pupil he was, and it is clear, from his own writings, that he
was acquainted with the writings of Philo and of Archimedes. He was,
however, the first to _describe_ these inventions, and therefore it is
only fair, in the absence of other evidence, to give him the credit.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.]

There can be no doubt that puppets or dolls are of great antiquity;
they were common with the ancient Egyptians, and here (Fig. 15) is an
illustration of a doll from Thebes which is now in the British Museum,
and you will notice that the head is covered with holes which served
for the insertion of strings of beads to represent hair. Puppets were
also in use with the Greeks, and afterwards found their way to Rome,
and it is an interesting fact that, about three years ago, while the
ground was being excavated for the foundations of the new Palais de
Justice at Rome, at a spot not far from the Vatican, a stone coffin
was discovered containing the skeleton of a young girl of about
fifteen years of age, who had teeth of great beauty, and in her arms
was a beautifully modelled wooden doll with jointed limbs which was
dressed in a rich material. The interment had taken place in the time
of Pliny, who refers to the child, and mentions that she was engaged
to be married, a statement which is supported by the fact that on one
of the fingers is a doubly-linked gold ring, besides other ornaments.
The coffin, with its contents as they were found, is now in the museum
in the Capitol and it is, I believe, the only instance of an ancient
doll having been found in Rome, although moving puppets or marionettes
were known in very ancient times, and are referred to by Xenophon,
Aristotle, Horace, Antoninus, Galen, and Aulus Gellius.

The next figure is an illustration of what I suppose must be the very
earliest moving doll in existence to-day; it is now in the Museum
van Oudheden at Leyden, and is a toy which belonged to a child of
ancient Egypt; I have constructed a model of it by which you will
see that it is worked by pulling a thread; and here I must make a
passing reference to the notorious phallic figures which were carried
in procession during the festivals of Osiris and in the Dionysia
of Bacchus. We are told by Lucian[7] that “Among the several sorts
of Phalloi which the Greeks set up in honour of Bacchus there were
figures of dwarfs with moving parts actuated by strings, which were
called ‘Νευροσπαστα’.” In so eminently proper a community as We are
in Ye Sette of Odd Volumes, I am unable to describe these figures in
detail, or to exhibit them in action, but those who are _curious_ as
well as _odd_ will find abundant evidence of them in the writings
of Herodotus, of Lucian, of Pausanias, of Athenæus, of Plutarch, of
Gyraldus, and of several other writers.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.]

The earliest forms of moving puppets were set in motion by strings
pulled by hand which were afterwards supplanted by cylinders turned by
a winch, and the transition from that arrangement to the use of weights
and springs was inevitable and was only a question of time.

From the time of Hero I have found nothing worth recording for nearly
a thousand years, until the time of Charlemagne, to which monarch was
presented by the Kalif Haroun al Raschid a most elaborate water clock.
In front of the dial, and corresponding to the hours, were twelve
little doors, and the time was shown by these doors opening one after
another, each releasing a little brass ball which fell upon a small
bell; after all the hours had struck, that is, at noon, another door
opened, twelve little knights rode out, and, after careering round
the dial, they closed the doors and retired. The eminent mechanician
Gerbert who occupied the papal chair in A.D. 1000, reigning under the
name of Silvester II., is said to have constructed a speaking head
of brass, and was in consequence arrested for practising magic, and
Albertus Magnus, who flourished in the thirteenth century, spent,
according to his own account, thirty years in the construction of
an automaton of clay which not only spoke but walked and answered
questions and solved problems submitted to it. It is recorded that his
pupil, the celebrated St. Thomas Aquinas was so horrified when he saw
and heard this figure that (believing it to be the work of his Satanic
Majesty), he broke it into pieces, when Albertus cried aloud: “Sic
periit opus triginta annorum.” I deeply regret this mischievous act of
St. Thomas Aquinas, because it renders it impossible for me to show it
to the Brethren and our guests this evening. Roger Bacon also is said
to have made a similar automaton.

Records of speaking androides or talking heads reach us from very
early times. At Lesbos there was a head of Orpheus which delivered
oracles and predicted to Cyrus his violent death, and we have it on
the authority of Philostratus that the head was so celebrated for its
oracular utterances, among both the Greeks and the Persians that even
Apollo became jealous of its fame.

Then again the mighty Odin had among his mystical possessions a
speaking head, believed to be that of Minos, which Odin preserved by
encasing it in solid gold. He is said to have consulted it on all
occasions, and its utterances were regarded as oracles.

Mention might here be made of the colossal figure of Amunoph III. on
the plain of Thebes, and which is commonly known as the “vocal Memnon,”
of which a photograph is now before you; it is the more eastern of the
two Colossi, and, when the first rays of the morning sun fell on it,
it emitted a sound which has been described as similar to that of the
snapping of a harp string, but it has been silent since the time of
Severus. It is a seated figure nearly sixty feet in height, and is in
no sense an automaton, but I mention it here because it was believed to
utter sentences which the ancient priests of Egypt alone, for the very
best of reasons, knew how to interpret.

In more modern times we hear of the eminent Dr. Wilkins, Bishop of
Chester (who married the sister of Oliver Cromwell, and who may be
regarded as the founder of the Royal Society), experimenting upon
the transmission of sound; and Evelyn, in his “Diary,” writing on
the 13th of July, 1654, says, “We all dined at that most obliging
and universally curious Dr. Wilkins’s, at Wadham College. He had
contrived a hollow statue, which gave a voice and uttered words”; and
in his “Mathematicall Magick,” (a copy of which I have here) which
was published in 1648, Wilkins refers to the speaking figures of the
ancients.

A contemporary of Wilkins was the celebrated Edward Somerset, Marquis
of Worcester, who in his “Century of Inventions” gives as his 88th
device: “How to make a Brazen or Stone-head in the midst of a great
Field or Garden, so artificial and natural that though a man speak
never so softly, and even whispers into the eare thereof, it will
presently open its mouth, and resolve the Question in French, Latine,
Welsh, Irish or English, in good terms uttering it out of his mouth,
and then shut it untill the next Question be asked.”—But, unhappily, he
does not tell us how it may be done.

The great period for the construction of automata began at the close
of the fourteenth century, and reached its climax at the end of the
seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth century. One of the
earliest mechanicians who devoted his skill to automata was Johann
Müller, of Königsberg, commonly known as Regiomontanus. This eminent
mathematician and astronomer made of iron a fly which is said to have
left his hand and, after flying to each of the guests in the room,
returned to its master, alighting on his hand. Müller made also a still
more wonderful machine; this was an artificial eagle which, on the
authority of Peter Ramus, flew to meet the Emperor Maximilian on his
entry into Nuremberg on the 7th of June, 1470. After soaring aloft in
the air, Ramus informs us, the eagle met the emperor at some distance
from the city, then returned and perched upon the city gate where it
awaited the emperor’s approach. On his arrival the bird stretched out
its wings and saluted him by bowing.

It is a remarkable fact that not one of Müller’s contemporaries, who
often refer to this learned man and to his great accomplishments,
makes any reference to these pieces of mechanism, and Peter Ramus
was not born until forty-five years after, but they are referred to
by Baptista Porta, Gassendi, Lana, and Bishop Wilkins, who, however,
differ considerably in their dates. Strada, in his “De Bello Belgico,”
tells us that the Emperor Charles V., after his abdication in 1556,
took a most keen interest in automata of various kinds, and he employed
a very skilful artist, Janellus Turrianus, of Cremona, to construct
them for him. This mechanic made figures of horsemen which marched
along the table, played upon flutes and drums, and entered into combat
with one another, and he exhibited wooden birds which flew up to their
nests (they must, I think, have been _wood pigeons_). This Janellus
Turrianus was evidently a very wonderful man, for he made a corn-mill
so small that it could be concealed in a glove, and yet could grind in
a day as much corn as would supply eight men with food. I never saw
this machine myself, and I cannot help thinking that either the glove
must have been rather large or the appetites of the men must have been
rather small. Apart, however, from the exaggeration of the genius
of this man, he was undoubtedly a most skilful mechanician, for he
repaired and considerably improved a most complex clock constructed
by Wilhelm Zelandin for the city of Padua, in which moving figures and
astronomical phenomena were represented.

The addition to clocks of automata set in motion by the train was a
very favourite occupation of the horologists of the sixteenth century.
Of these clocks perhaps the most celebrated was that at Strasburg,
which was constructed by Conrad Dasypodius. This clock was finished in
the year 1573. Apart from its interesting representations of various
celestial phenomena, it is remarkable for the number of moving figures
which embellish it, and which perform various functions; above the dial
the four ages of man are represented by symbolical figures; one passes
every quarter of an hour, marking the quarter by striking on a bell;
the first quarter is struck by a child with an apple, the second by a
youth with an arrow, the third by a man with his staff, and the fourth
by an old man with his crutch. After these follows the figure of Death,
who, after sounding the hour on a large bell, is expelled by a figure
representing Christ, while two small angels are set into motion, the
one striking a bell with a sceptre, while the other turns over an
hour-glass at the expiration of an hour. There are, besides, various
animals, and among them a cock, which flaps its wings and crows just
before the clock strikes the hour.

The great clock at Lyons, the work of Lippius of Basle, is hardly
less interesting. Besides exhibiting mechanical illustrations of
astronomical phenomena, a complete cycle of operations representing
scriptural events is performed. Before each hour strikes a cock comes
forward and crows three times, after which angels appear, who by
striking upon a gamut of bells ring out the air of a hymn, and this is
followed by a moving group illustrating the Annunciation of the Virgin
and the descent of a dove, and the cycle is completed by the striking
of the hour.

In the Royal Palace of Versailles there was a very curious clock, the
work of Martinot, a clockmaker of the seventeenth century. Before it
struck the hour two cocks flapped their wings and crowed alternately,
then two little doors opened and a figure came out of each carrying a
gong which was struck by armed guards with their clubs. These figures
having retired, a door in the centre opened and an equestrian figure
of Louis XIV. came out. At the same time a group of clouds separated
giving passage to the figure of Fame which hovered over the head of the
king. An air was then chimed upon the bells, after which the figures
retired; the two guards raised their clubs and the hour was struck.

In the year 1788, Agostino Ramelli published his important work “_Le
diverse ed artificiose Machine_,” and I have reproduced some of the
plates in that beautiful book, a copy of which is before me (one of
which, Fig. 17, see _Frontispiece_, I have chosen to adorn the menu
which is on the table, for no other reason than that it appeared
especially appropriate as figurative of the desire of your humble
Mechanick to be for ever associated with Ye Sette of Odd Volumes).

[Illustration: Fig. 18.]

In the next illustration (Fig. 18) we have a beautiful plate from
Ramelli, in which another of Hero’s inventions, the group of singing
birds is introduced as an ornament in an elaborately furnished room
of the period. In this case the water is in the first instance lifted
by air being blown in through a pipe by a person concealed behind the
wall which in the drawing is broken away to show a mediæval old buffer
engaged in this manly performance.

About the middle of the seventeenth century magnetism began to be
employed for producing the effects of magic, and that extraordinary
versatile all-round Odd Volume, Athanasius Kircher, in his “Magnes
sive de Arte Magnetica,” which was published in 1641 (a copy of which
I have here), describes and illustrates several automata which depend
for their action upon magnetism. Here, for example (Fig. 19), he gives
a representation of the Dove of Archytas, which by the action of a
revolving loadstone, is made to fly around a dial and mark the hours by
pointing to the figures on its edge.

[Illustration: Fig. 20.]

Time will not permit me to say as much about this curious old book
as its quaintness and terribly bad science deserve, I will only show
you one more illustration from it in which a wheel is driven round
by two Æolipiles in the form of human heads, which blow out jets of
steam against the cellular periphery of the wheel, and in the lower
figure the little boilers (C and D) which the heads inclose, are shown
separately, the nozzle of one pointing upwards, while that of the other
has a downward direction.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.]

When Kircher’s book was published Louis XIV. was a child, and it is
stated by several authorities that both Père Truchet and Camus made the
most elaborate automata for his boyish amusement, but as Louis XIV. was
forty years old when Truchet came of age and fifty-five When Camus was
twenty-one it is difficult to reconcile these statements with facts.

Putting aside, however, the question of the period of life when the
king amused himself with such things, it is well authenticated that
Père Truchet, towards the end of the seventeenth century, constructed
for him moving pictures which exhibited extraordinary mechanical skill.
One of these was the representation of a five-act opera, the scenery of
which was automatically changed between the acts. The actors came on
and went off, and performed their parts in pantomime. The proscenium
was about sixteen inches in breadth and thirteen in height, and the
whole of the machinery with the scenery occupied a space only an inch
and a quarter in depth.[8]

The account given by Camus of a toy he constructed for this baby king
of fifty summers is very wonderful. This elaborate automaton consisted
of a small coach drawn by two horses and which contained the figure of
a lady with a footman and a page behind. When this little coach was
placed on the edge of a suitable table the coachman smacked his whip
and the horses immediately started, moving their legs in a most natural
manner; when they reached the opposite edge of the table they turned
sharply at right angles and proceeded along that edge. As soon as the
carriage arrived opposite the king it stopped and both the footman and
page got down and opened the door, the lady alighted, and, curtseying
to the king, presented a petition. After waiting a few minutes she
bowed again to the king and re-entered the carriage, the page got up
again behind, the coachman whipped up his horses and drove on, and the
footman running after the carriage jumped up into his former place. In
the account given by M. de Camus he does not attempt to describe the
mechanism of the machine and we have his word alone for the account of
its performance.

The great philosopher Descartes formed the theory that all animals
are merely automata of a high degree of perfection, and, to prove his
notion, he is said to have constructed an automaton in the form of
a young girl to which he gave the name of “Ma fille Francine.” This
figure came unhappily to a watery grave, for during a voyage by sea
the captain of the vessel in which it was travelling had the curiosity
to open the case in which Francine was packed and, in his astonishment
at the movements of the automaton, which were so wonderfully natural,
he threw the whole thing overboard, believing it to be the work of the
devil.

I now come to what are, if not the most extraordinary _pieces of
mechanism_, certainly the most wonderful _automata_ the world has ever
seen. In the year 1738 that great mechanical genius M. Vaucanson, a
member of the Académie des Sciences exhibited at Paris three very
remarkable automata which were, a flute-player, a figure which played
the shepherd’s pipe of Provence and the drum, and an artificial duck.
The first of these, the flute-player, he described in a Memoir read
before the Académie on the 30th of April, 1738. This automaton was a
wooden figure six feet six inches in height, representing a well-known
antique statue of a Faun, sitting on a rock and mounted on a square
pedestal four feet six from the ground. It was capable of performing
twelve pieces of music on a German flute, the instrument being really
played as a man would play it by blowing across the embouchure
and projecting the air with variable force by movable lips, which
imitated in their action those of a living player, employing a tongue
to regulate the opening, and producing the notes by the tips of the
fingers closing or opening the holes.

The mechanical devices in this automaton are so beautiful and so
scientifically thought out, that I am only sorry that time will not
permit me to describe them in detail, but I will try and make its
general principles clear.

Within the pedestal was a train of wheel-work driven by a weight, which
set into motion a small shaft on which were six cranks disposed at
equal angular distances around it; to these six cranks as many pairs
of bellows were attached (their inlet valves being mechanically opened
and closed so as to make them silent in action). The air supplied by
these bellows was conveyed to three different wind chests, one loaded
with a weight of four pounds, one with a weight of two pounds, and
the last having only the weight of its upper board. These wind chests
communicated with three little chambers in the body of the figure, and
these chambers were all connected with the windpipe which passed up the
throat to the cavity of the mouth and terminated in the two movable
lips which, between them, formed an orifice that could be protruded or
drawn back, and might be further modified by the action of the tongue.

The train of wheels also set into motion a cylinder twenty inches in
diameter and two feet six inches long; on this were fixed a number
of brass bars of different lengths and thicknesses which in their
revolution acted upon a row of fifteen keys or levers; three of these
corresponded to the three little wind chambers containing air at
different pressures, and, by means of little chains, operated their
respective valves. There were seven levers set apart for operating the
fingers, their respective chains making bends at the shoulders and
elbows of the automaton, and terminated at the wrist in the ends of
what I may call metacarpal levers attached to the fingers which were
armed at their tips with leather to imitate the flesh of the natural
hand.

The motion of the mouth was controlled by four of the levers, one to
open the lips so as to give to the wind a greater issue, one to bring
them closer together, and so contract the passage, a third to draw the
lips backward and away from the flute, and the fourth to push them
forward over the edge of the embouchure.

The last of the fifteen levers is the cleverest of all, for it has
the power of controlling the tongue, an accomplishment which I think
everyone (unless he be an Odd Volume) will agree with me is a very
difficult one to acquire.

The barrel worked upon a screwed bearing (similar to that of the
cylinder of a phonograph), so that in its revolution all the levers
described a spiral line sixty-four inches long, and, as the barrel
during the performance made twelve revolutions it followed that the
levers passed over a distance of no less than 768 inches in going
through its performance of twelve tunes.

In a Memoir read before the Académie des Sciences, M. Vaucanson
described the very beautiful methods by which the barrel was set out,
and by which the positions of the bars were determined on its surface
so as to regulate the supply of air and to control the actions of the
fingers, the motion of the lips and the movements of the tongue; and he
gave a most interesting analysis of the acoustics of wind instruments;
but time will not permit me to make more than this passing reference to
them.

The picture on the screen (Fig. 21) is a photographic reproduction of
the plate attached to M. Vaucanson’s Memoir (a somewhat rare little
tract published in 1738) in which his three automata are shown, and I
hold in my hand a copy of the translation by Dr. Desaguliers, published
in London in 1742, which, the imprint tells us, was “_sold at the long
room at the Opera House in the Haymarket, where the mechanical figures
are to be seen at 1, 2, 5, and 7 o’clock in the afternoon_.”

[Illustration: Fig. 21.]

The second of Vaucanson’s automata was his celebrated model of a duck,
which he himself described in a letter to the Abbé de la Fontaine in
1738. This extraordinary automaton (according to the inventor’s own
account of it), exhibited a considerable amount of physiological and
anatomical knowledge and the most profound mechanical skill, for in it
the operation of eating, drinking, and digestion, were very closely
imitated. The duck stretched out its neck to take corn from the
hand, it swallowed it and discharged it in a digested condition, the
digestion being effected not by trituration, but by dissolution, and
(to quote the quaint expressions of the inventor), “The matter digested
in the stomach is conducted by pipes (as in an animal by the guts),
quite to the anus, where there is a sphincter that lets it out. I don’t
pretend,” he says, “to give this as a perfect _digestion_, capable of
producing blood and nutritive particles for the support of the animal.
I hope nobody will be so unkind as to upbraid me with pretending to any
such thing. I only pretend to imitate the mechanism of their action in
these things, _i.e._, first, to swallow the corn; secondly, macerate or
dissolve it; thirdly, to make it come out sensibly changed from what
it was.” But (on the same authority), besides being furnished with a
digestive system, the wings were anatomical imitations of nature; not
only was every bone imitated, but all the processes and eminences of
each bone, and the joints were articulated as in a real animal.

After having been wound up, the duck ate and drank, played in the water
with his bill, making what is described as a “gugling” sound, rose
up on its legs and sat down, flapped its wings, dressed its feathers
with its bill, and performed all these different operations without
requiring to be touched again.

It is important, however, to point out that this digestion story can
only be “digested” _cum grano salis_, and this is supplied in the
sequel which furnishes the explanation. In the year 1840 the automaton
was found hidden away in a garret in Berlin; it was very much out of
order, and a mechanician of the name of Georges Tiets undertook to
repair it. It was taken to Paris, and in the year 1844 was exhibited in
the Place du Palais Royal. In the course of this exhibition one of the
wings became deranged, and it was put into the hands of Robert-Houdin
for repairs. Robert-Houdin took advantage of this opportunity for
examining the so-called digestive system of the automaton, and he thus
describes its action:

“On présentait à l’animal un vase dans lequel était de la graine
baignant dans l’eau. Le mouvement que faisait le bec en barbotant
divisait la nourriture et en facilitait l’introduction dans un tuyau
placé sous le bec inférieur du canard; l’eau et la graine, ainsi
aspirés tombaient dans une boîte placée sous le ventre de _l’automate_,
laquelle se vidait toutes les trois ou quatre séances. L’évacuation
était chose préparée à l’avance; une espèce de boullie, composée de
mie de pain colorée de vert, était poussée par un coup de pompe et
soigneusement reçue, sur un plateau en argent, comme produit d’une
digestion artificielle,” so that, after all, this wonderful digestion
of Vaucanson’s duck was nothing more than a clever trick.

The third automaton of Vaucanson was a figure that played on a
shepherd’s pipe with one hand while it beat a drum with the other. The
instrument played upon was a little pipe with only three holes, and
the different notes were produced by a greater or less pressure of air
and a more or less closing of the holes, and every note, no matter how
rapid was the succession, had to be modified by the tongue. In this
machine there were provided as many different pressures of air as there
were notes to be sounded, and the mechanism by which these operations
and the fingering of the keys were effected reflects the greatest
credit on the memory of this remarkable man.[9]

The Automaton duck of Vaucanson was, to a certain extent, anticipated
by the Comte de Gennes, Governor of the Island of Saint Christopher,
who, we are told by Père Labat, constructed a peacock which could walk
about and pick up grains of corn, which it swallowed and digested. I
have no means of determining whether or not Vaucanson took the idea of
his duck from this automaton, but that Vaucanson had imitators there is
abundant evidence to prove. In the year 1752, Du Moulin, a silversmith,
travelled all over Europe with automata similar to those of Vaucanson,
and they were afterwards purchased in Nuremberg, by Bereis, a
counsellor of Helmstadt, at whose place they were seen by Beckmann in
1754.

In the year 1760, there was a writing automaton exhibited in Vienna,
which was constructed by Friedrich von Knaus, and about the same time
a number of very curious automata were made by Le Droz, of Chaux de
Fonds, in Neufchatel. One of these was a clock, presented to the King
of Spain, which had, in addition to several moving figures, a sheep
that bleated in a very natural way, and a dog mounting guard over
a basket of fruit; if anyone attempted to touch the basket the dog
barked and growled, and if any of the fruit were taken away the barking
continued until it was restored.

The son of this man (who lived at Geneva), was no less skilful a
mechanician, for he made a gold snuffbox about 4-1/2 inches long by 3
inches broad, in which when a spring was touched a little door flew
open and a beautifully modelled bird of green enamelled gold rose
up, fluttered its wings and tail, and commenced a trilling song of
great beauty and power, its beak keeping time with the notes. Such a
snuffbox was exhibited in the Great Exhibition of 1851, proving as
great a popular attraction as the Koh-i-nur diamond, and (owing to the
kindness of my friend Mr. Tripplin the well-known horologist) I am now
able to show you one of these very beautiful triumphs of mechanical
skill.

Another of the younger Le Droz’s inventions was his celebrated drawing
automaton, which was a life-size figure of a man sitting behind a table
and holding a style in his hand. A sheet of vellum was placed on the
table, and the figure began to draw portraits of well-known persons
with extraordinary correctness. This automaton was shown in London, and
attracted considerable attention at the time.

[Illustration: Fig. 22.]

I must now re-introduce to you another old friend, first shown here by
Brother Manning. Here he is! a little acrobat that turns somersaults
backwards down stairs. This is not, as many have thought, an invention
of that great mechanical genius, Robert-Houdin, for it is figured and
described in Musschenbroeck’s “Introductio ad philosophiam naturalem,”
which was published in Leyden in 1762 (a year after the author’s
death), and half a century before Robert-Houdin was born, and on the
screen you have a facsimile (Fig. 22) of Musschenbroeck’s illustration
of this mechanical toy, which he refers to as “an old invention of
the Chinese.” It is also described by Ozanam in his “Recréations
Mathématiques et Physiques,” the first edition of which was published
in 1694. The figure I now throw on the screen (Fig. 23), is taken from
the second edition of this work which was edited by Montucla in 1790.
The principle is exceedingly simple; the whole thing depends upon the
centre of gravity being suddenly changed by a shifting weight. Within
a tube contained within the body, is a small quantity of mercury, and
the moment that this tube is inclined to the horizon the mercury flows
to the lower end tilting one figure over the other, and with such force
that it is carried over by its inertia far enough to tilt the tubes,
and cause the mercury to flow to the opposite end, and the process
is repeated as long as there are stairs to descend; by a very simple
arrangement of strings passing over pulleys, the legs and arms are
always brought into suitable positions to support the figure in every
position of its descent.

[Illustration: Fig. 23.]

I now come to the automaton which for some years was the wonder of
every country in Europe, the automaton chess-player of the Baron
Wolfgang von Kempelen, constructed in 1776. This automaton was a
life-size sitting figure dressed as a Turk, and having before it a
large rectangular chest or cabinet, 3 feet 6 inches long, 2 feet deep,
and 2 feet 6 inches high, on the top of which was a chessboard and
a set of men. The seat on which the figure sat, was attached to the
cabinet and the whole was on castors, so that it could be wheeled
about the floor. When the automaton was exhibited, the exhibitor began
operations by opening the doors of the cabinet so as to show its
contents, and here I will throw on the screen a copy (Fig. 24) of one
of the plates in a curious pamphlet,[10] printed anonymously in 1821,
but probably by Professor Willis. It must, however, be recollected
that these doors were opened in succession, and never all at the same
time, but whichever door was opened, nothing could be seen but wheels,
levers, connecting rods, strings and cylinders. After this the doors
were closed and locked, the machinery was wound up, and the figure was
ready to play a game of chess with any one who would challenge him. On
commencing the game the figure moved its head, and seemed to look at
every part of the board. When it checked the king, it nodded its head
three times, and when it threatened the queen, it nodded twice. It also
shook its head when its adversary made a false move, and replaced the
offending piece. It nearly always won the game, but occasionally lost.

When it was completed, it was exhibited in Riga, Moscow, St.
Petersburg, Berlin, Presburg and Vienna, coming to London in 1783, and
having been seen by many thousands during those years with out its
secret being discovered, but in the year 1789, a book was published
by Mr. Freyherre of Dresden, in which he showed that “a well taught
boy very thin and tall of his age, (sufficiently so that he could be
concealed in a drawer below the chessboard,) agitated the whole.” In
the plate before you, you will see that the author has shown in dotted
lines, the position a boy might take when the left hand door was
opened.

[Illustration: Fig. 24.]

The real story of this most ingenious and successful scientific fraud
is so interesting that I must tell it here, although it puts for
ever Baron von Kempelen’s chess-player outside the circle of true
automata. In the year 1776, a regiment, half Russian and half Polish,
mutinied at Riga. The mutineers were defeated, and their chief officer,
Worouski, fell, having had both his thighs fractured by a cannon ball.
He hid himself in a ditch until after dark, when he dragged himself
to the neighbouring house of a doctor named Osloff, a man of great
benevolence, who took him in and concealed him, but he had to amputate
both his legs. During the time of Worouski’s illness, Osloff was
visited by his intimate friend the Baron von Kempelen, and after many
consultations and much thought, Kempelen hit upon the idea of conveying
him out of the country by devising this automaton (as Worouski was a
great chess-player), and in three months the figure was finished.

In order to avoid suspicion he gave performances _en route_ to the
frontier. The first performance was given at Toula, on the 6th of
November, 1777 (that is to say exactly 114 years ago to-day). The
machine and Worouski were packed in a case and started for Prussia, but
when they reached Riga, orders came from the Empress Katherine II.,
for Baron von Kempelen to go to St. Petersburg with his automaton.
The Empress played several games with him, but was always beaten, and
then she wanted to buy the figure. This was an awkward situation for
Kempelen, and he was at his wits’ end to know how to wriggle out of
it. He declared that his own presence was absolutely necessary for the
working of the machine, and that it was quite impossible for him to
sell it, and, after some further discussion, he was allowed to proceed
on his journey.

This chess-player was, in the same year, purchased by Mons. Anthon, who
took it all over Europe. At his death it came into the hands of Johann
Maelzel, the inventor of the Metronome, who sent it to the United
States. It was afterwards sent back to Europe, and in the year 1844 was
in the possession of a mechanician of Belleville, named Croizier.

Maelzel himself was a mechanician of very considerable skill, and he
constructed an automaton trumpeter, which was exhibited at Vienna
about the year 1804, which played the Austrian and French cavalry
marches, and marches and allegros by Weigl, Dussek, and Pleyel.
Maelzel was, after that, appointed mechanician to the Austrian Court,
and constructed an automatic orchestra, in which trumpets, flutes,
clarionets, violins, violoncellos, drums, cymbals, and a triangle, were
introduced, and this attracted very great interest in the Austrian
capital at the time.

In the year 1772 there was in Spring Gardens, near Charing Cross,
a most remarkable collection of automata exhibited in a place of
entertainment known as Cox’s Museum, and here I have an original copy
of the “_Descriptive catalogue, of the several superb and magnificent
pieces of mechanism and jewellery exhibited in Mr. Cox’s Museum, at
Spring Gardens, Charing Cross_.” To which this footnote is added,
“_Hours of Admission, 11, 2, and 7, every day (Sundays excepted),
tickets Half a Guinea each, admitting one person, to be had at Mr.
Cox’s, No. 103, Shoe Lane_.” This was a very extraordinary exhibition,
and contained upwards of twenty large and elaborate automata, several
of them being adorned with gold and precious stones. Some were
complicated clocks, some were large groups of animals, and figures with
fountains and cascades around them. None of these objects was less
than nine feet high, and some were as high as sixteen feet. I can find
nothing important enough from a Mechanick’s point of view, to describe
in detail, but it was the precursor in the same place of the exhibition
of Monsieur Maillardet, which was one of the London attractions at the
beginning of the present century.

M. Maillardet exhibited a bird automaton (similar to that already
referred to which was made by Le Droz), and whose performance lasted
four minutes with one winding up. He constructed also a spider,
entirely of steel, which imitated all the actions of the real animal,
it ran round and round the table in a spiral line, tending towards the
centre. Maillardet made automata representing a caterpillar, a mouse,
a lizard, and a serpent; the last crawled about all over the table,
darted its tongue in and out, and produced a hissing sound.

Maillardet’s most important automata were, however, his drawing and
writing figure, and his pianoforte player. The former was a kneeling
boy, who wrote in ink with an ordinary pen, sentences in English
and in French, and drew landscapes. The pianist was a figure of a
lady, who performed eighteen pieces of music. She began by bowing
to the audience, her bosom heaved, and her eyes first looked at the
music, and then followed the motion of her fingers, and the music
was produced by the keys being played on by the fingers; but the
most remarkable of M. Maillardet’s machines, was a magician, or
fortune-teller, which gave answers to some twenty given questions,
which were inscribed on as many counters or medallions. One of these
medallions having been put into a drawer, the figure arose from his
seat, bowed to the audience, and described mystic circles in the air
with his wand; after appearing to consult his book of mysteries, he
struck a little door behind him, which flew open, and exhibited an
appropriate answer to the question on the medallion.

The general principle upon which this automaton’s power of selection
was founded lay in the fact that in the edge of each medallion there
was a small hole drilled, but no two holes were drilled to the same
depth, and, by an exceedingly delicate mechanism, the varying depth
to which a pin could be thrust into the edge of a disc, was caused to
control the mechanism by which the various answers were selected, and
which were exhibited when the little door flew open.

The next great master of automaton design and construction, was that
wonderful genius Robert-Houdin (about whom our worthy Secretary and
Seer discoursed to us so pleasantly and so instructively nearly a year
ago). Brother Manning’s paper was so complete in itself, and that part
of it which dealt with automata was so ably illustrated, that it will
be quite unnecessary for me to add to the length of this communication,
by going over that ground again, so I will merely enumerate the
automata of that interesting man and pass on to still more recent times.

The first of the automata of Robert-Houdin was a confectioner’s shop,
in which a pastry-cook came out of the door when requested and offered
to the spectators patisserie, bonbons, and refreshments of every
description, and within the shop might be seen the assistants making
pastry, rolling out the dough, and putting it into the oven. Then he
made two clowns, known as Auriol and Débureau. The first of these
performed a number of acrobatic feats upon a chair which was held at
arm’s length by the other. After this, the figure of Auriol smoked a
pipe, and accompanied on the flageolet an air played by the orchestra.

Another was an acrobat which performed tricks on the trapèze, and the
last to which I shall refer, was his celebrated writing figure, which
is illustrated in Brother Manning’s “Opusculum,” No. XXIV., to which I
must refer you for a great deal of interesting information respecting
that remarkable man.

A contemporary of Robert-Houdin was Mons. Mareppe, who constructed a
very wonderful automaton violin player, and which was exhibited at the
Conservatoire at Paris, in the year 1838, and which performed on the
violin by bowing and fingering the strings, and in an account of the
performance which was published at the time in “Galignani’s Messenger,”
it is stated that the musical execution was so perfect as to bring
tears into the eyes of the audience.

Coming to our own period, from the time of Robert-Houdin, there have
been no great automata which will live in the history of the subject,
until the year 1875, when Mr. J. N. Maskelyne (who, I am happy to
tell you, is honouring us with his presence to-night) exhibited at
the Egyptian Hall his marvellous “Psycho.” This was a seated figure,
supported by a cylindrical pedestal of glass which stood upon a little
platform, and, being on castors, could be wheeled about the floor. This
automaton can actually play a game of whist, selecting the cards from a
rack in front of it, and playing a most skilful game. The machine works
apparently without any mechanical connection with anything outside,
and the delicacy and precision of its actions, display the most
consummate skill in design, and give to its inventor a high position
for mechanical science. This automaton also works out arithmetical
calculations, with numbers from one to a hundred millions, showing the
result behind a door which opens in front of its box.

Another of Mr. Maskelyne’s automata, is the celebrated “Zoe” of 1877,
a sitting figure supported like the last on a glass pedestal so as to
exclude the possibility of an electrical system of communication. A
sheet of paper is fastened on to the table in front, and the figure
traces out very fair portraits of public characters chosen by the
audience out of a list of some two hundred names.

In respect to these most beautiful machines I must refrain from
revealing to you the secrets of their working, and that for two
reasons, first, because I do not know them myself; and second, because
Mr. Maskelyne is here and is doubtless only impatient to jump up when I
sit down and tell us all about them.

I do not intend to say anything about speaking machines or to do
more than make a passing reference to the very interesting work and
researches of Kircher in 1650, Van Helmont, 1667, Kratzenstein, in
1780, L’Abbé Mical, in 1783, Von Kempelen in 1791, Willis in 1829,
Wheatstone in 1837, or of Faber in 1862. All these mechanicians and
physicists studied the philosophy of speech and produced machines or
parts of machines, which could utter vowels, words or even sentences,
but these machines were operated by keys and stops and were, in no
sense of the term, automata.

I must, however, refer to one of the greatest marvels of modern
science, the phonograph which Mr. Edison has applied in the
construction of his talking dolls. Edison’s talking doll is a figure,
within which a little phonograph, driven by a little winch, is
concealed, and which repeats in a clear voice any sentence or rhyme
which may have been spoken against its recording cylinder or disc.
I am deeply disappointed to be unable to show you one of these most
interesting automata to-night, for one is on its way to me across the
Atlantic. Colonel Gourand very kindly sent for one that I might show
it to you this evening, and I deeply regret that it has not arrived in
time, for the Odd Volumes would, otherwise, have been the first to hear
its voice in Europe.[11]

In the phonograph, that splendid triumph of acoustical and mechanical
science, we have literally fulfilled, the prediction made by Sir David
Brewster in 1883, when he wrote “I have no doubt that before another
century is completed, a talking and a singing Machine will be numbered
among the conquests of Science.”

No one who is familiar with any of the great European capitals can
have failed to notice in the windows of the higher class of toy-shops,
clock-work automata of various kinds. We have jugglers and rope
dancers, conjurers, pianists, violinists, harpists and trumpeters,
dancing niggers, figures fighting, knitting, sewing, writing, and
engaged in almost every occupation performed by human beings, but none
that I have seen are fit for comparison with the wonderful mechanical
works of Vaucanson, Robert-Houdin or Maskelyne; mechanically they are
nearly identical with one another, and differ only in the external
application of the internal machinery. At International Exhibitions one
sees one or two of superior merit, but I have not recently seen any of
sufficient importance to bring before you this evening. The pianists
and other musicians merely move their hands on their instruments,
but the music (save the mark) whether it be a violin or a trumpet,
comes from a musical snuffbox inside which is generally wound up by
a different key. These figures are usually very costly, and I am
always puzzled to know who are the people who purchase them. The best
are generally those mechanical toys which represent the movements of
animals, and here I have a mechanical bear which is rather amusing,
and it is ingenious because by a very simple combination of clock work
with cranks and strings a number of different motions is obtained; we
have the mouth opening and shutting, the head going from side to side,
the lips moving and the whole animal bowing to the spectators.

Within the last few years a most extraordinary amount of mechanical
ingenuity has been brought to bear upon the construction of small
automatic toys, which are sold in the streets for a few pence, and
I think, even more than the extraordinarily simple and ingenious
contrivances by which the various effects are produced, the great
inventive merit consists in a design and method of manufacture by which
they can be turned out, with a profit, at so insignificant a cost. I
have brought together a few examples, a very minute fraction of the
hundreds of forms that exist, but selected merely to illustrate the
different types of principle of action.

A very favourite motive power is a wound up spring, consisting of
strands of vulcanized india-rubber, and here I have one of the
well-known butterflies which come out in Paris in 1878, where they
filled the air of the Avenue de l’Opera, the shops of which were then
occupied chiefly by hawkers of toys. The motive power of this toy
is nothing more than a light screw propeller or fan rotated by the
untwisting of a spring, while on the body of the machine are two fixed
wings or fins to prevent the whole machine from rotating. The action is
wonderfully like that of an animal, perhaps most like that of a bat.
Here again the same principle is applied in a running mouse, and this
is especially interesting from the fact that the machine winds itself
up the moment the tension of the cord is relaxed, and as the spindle of
the wheels is the flexible rubber itself the peculiar scuttling action
of a mouse is well imitated.

There is again a large class of mechanical toys in which there is a
combination of a rubber spring with a wheel and escapement, the pallets
of which by their reciprocating motion producing whatever effect may
be desired; the swimming fish is one of them, the wagging of the tail
being produced in the way I have described. Here is another displaying
considerable ingenuity. In this case an escapement wheel works a crutch
which by a pair of cranks linked together causes each of two pugilists
to turn a little way backwards and forwards on one heel, and the arms
being hung loosely to the shoulders by rubber hinges give to the
figures the appearance of hitting out vigorously.

I have here a couple of figures which I admit do not contain their
motive power within themselves but they require so little aid from
outside and do so much for themselves that I have been tempted to
bring them in. Here is a monkey climbing a rope, and its progression
is insured by the simplest possible device, the string passes over one
pin and under another in his posterior hands while the anterior pair of
hands grip the rope with a slight degree of friction: if the string be
tightened the lower hands act as a lever which pushes the body up, but
when it is slack it slips round the pins and does no work, in other
words the grip of the hands is greater than that of the feet when the
cord is slack but less when it is tight.

In this little animated skeleton, we have an immense effect produced by
an extraordinarily small external motion. The squeeze that I give to
this U shaped spring, by varying the tension of the twisted strings, on
which the skeleton is suspended, is almost infinitesimal—but it gives
to the skeleton considerably more energy than is usually to be found in
skeletons.

Here we have a walking figure whose action depends upon gravity, but
his progression is checked by the friction of his feet on the board on
which he performs, first one foot catches and then another, and each
time his inertia turns him round, which gives him an appearance of
having been in the company of teetotallers, or can he have been dining
with the Sette of Odd Volumes?

A familiar form of mechanical or automatic toys is in the form of a
box or frame having a glass front, behind which figures of acrobats,
rope-dancers and moving groups are set into motion by sand falling on
a wheel within the case; and it is an ingenious feature of these toys
that they are “wound up” by simply rolling the box over on its edge
through one revolution, which has the effect of lifting the fallen sand
back into the upper reservoir.

The last great class of mechanical figures, to which I shall refer,
includes those which depend for their action upon the spinning of a top
or fly-wheel, and some of them are particularly pretty and ingenious.

Here, for example, is a couple of figures, which the gentleman who
sold it to me told me was “a Narry and a Narriet walking hout on
‘Ampstead ’Eath.” In this case the ruling spirit and go is as usual
in the _lady_, and the man has to follow whither she leads, the legs
of the man are connected together at the hips by a pair of cranks so
disposed, that if one leg be pushed back, the other is thereby thrown
forward. Now the heels are so cut that they catch in the ground when
in a forward position and can slide forward when behind; in being urged
along, the forward leg catching in the ground is relatively pushed back
and the other leg comes forward, which in its turn catches, and the
effect of walking is produced.

And here we have (Fig. 25) another on precisely the same principle, in
which an ostrich appears to draw a cart, which in reality, is pushing
him along, but the effect of the ostrich’s strut is delightfully
reproduced.

[Illustration: Fig. 25.]

Here is another in which several very curious motions are reproduced.
This beautiful little mechanical toy (Fig. 26) represents a circus
girl riding round the ring, and occasionally leaping over a bar or
bowing to the audience, while the prancing action of the horse is
ingeniously imitated. The motive power is derived from the spinning of
a top or fly-wheel, supported in a frame attached to the bar to which
the horse is fixed; and, as the spindle of the top spins on the
bevel edge of the circular base, the horse is caused to gallop round
in a circle, and, being supported on the table by a roller mounted
eccentrically on its axis, it prances up and down as it runs. The
equestrienne is attached to a light lever pivotted on the rotating
frame and revolving with it. Twice in its revolution this lever is
lifted by a cam, forming part of the base; the first lift causes the
figure to give a little bow, and the second, which is much greater,
makes her leap over the bar under which the horse runs. This little
machine is one of the most mechanically ingenious of the modern
automaton toys, and it is made at the cost of only a few pence.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.]

The last I shall show you is this elephant. In this little machine we
have a fly-wheel, which with its vertical shaft looks like an umbrella
over the Nabob who sits on the top, the vertical shaft passes into
the body of the elephant, and there by a simple frictional gearing,
rotates a couple of cranks to which the legs are connected. The effect
of spinning the umbrella is therefore merely to move the legs backwards
and forwards; and, if that were all, no progression could be effected;
but each foot rests on a little wheel or roller, which can only rotate
in one direction so that while it catches the ground in its backward
stroke it rolls freely over it while it is moving forward, and thus
each leg in its turn contributes to the progressive movement of the toy.

Now I have come to the end, and it only remains to me to thank you all
for having supported me by your presence in such numbers to-night, and
to say to you in the words of Othello:

    “It gives me wonder great as my content,
    To see you here before me.”

[Illustration]

                               Footnotes:

[1] The “Iliad” of Homer, translated by Alexander Pope, xviii. 440-444.

[2] “_Mathematicall Magick_, or the Wonders that may be performed by
Mechanicall Geometry.” London, printed by _M. E._ for _Sa: Gellibrand_
at the Brasen Serpent in _Paul’s_ Churchyard, 1648 (page 173).

[3] “Saturnaliorum Conviviorum,” Lib. I. cap. xxiii.

[4] Aulus Gellius, “Noctes Atticæ.” Lib. X. cap. xii.

[5] “_New and Rare Inventions of Water Workes_, shewing the easiest
waies to raise water higher than the spring. By which invention the
Perpetual Motion is proposed, many hard labours performed And variety
of Motions and Sounds produced. First written in French by Isaak de
Caus a late famous engineer; and now translated into English by John
Leak. London, Printed by Joseph Moxon. Folio. 1659.”

[6] See page 30.

[7] “De Syria Dea.”

[8] Mem. Acad. Sc. Paris, 1729.

[9] Beckmann in his “History of Inventions,” says that these automata
found their way to St. Petersburg, and that in 1764, he himself saw
them at the Palace of Zarsko-Selo, where he learnt that they had been
purchased from Vaucanson, but they were not, at that time, in working
order.

[10] “An Attempt to Analyse the Automaton Chess Player of Mr. de
Kempelen, with an easy method of imitating the movements of that
celebrated figure. Illustrated by original drawings. 8vo. London. 1821.”

[11] The author exhibited Edison’s talking doll at the Conversazione of
the Sette of Odd Volumes which was held the following month.




THE FOLLOWING EDITIONS OF OLD WORKS, IN ILLUSTRATION OF THE PAPER, WERE
EXHIBITED BY THE AUTHOR.


   1. John Wilkins, (Bishop of Chester,) _Mathematicall Magick_.
               (First Edition.) Sm. 8vo. London, 1648.

   2. —— _Ditto_. (Third Edition.) Sm. 8vo. London, 1680.

   3. —— _Ditto_. (Fourth Edition.) Sm. 8vo. London, 1691.

   4. Aulus Gellius, _Noctes Atticæ_. Folio. Paris, 1530.

   5. —— _Ditto_. Sm. 8vo. Lyons, 1546.

   6. —— _Ditto_. 12mo. (Elzevir.) Amsterdam, 1651.

   7. Hero, of Alexandria. _Spiritalia_. (Commandinus Edition.)
               Sm. 4to. Urbino, 1575.

   8. —— _Ditto_. (Aleotti Edition.) Sm. 4to. Ferrara, 1589.

   9. —— _Ditto_. (Georgi Edition.) 4to. Urbino, 1592.

  10. —— _Ditto_. (Aleotti Edition.) Sm. 4to. Amsterdam, 1680.

  11. —— _De gli automati overo machine se movente_. Sm. 4to.
               Venice, 1589.

  12. —— _Quatro theoremi aggiunti a gli artifitiosi Spiriti_.
               Sm. 4to. Ferrara, 1589.

  13. John Bate, _The Mysteries of Nature and Art_. Sm. 4to.
               London, 1654.
  14. Edward Somerset (Marquis of Worcester). _A Century of the Names
               and Scantlings of such Inventions, as at present I can
               call to mind_. 12mo. London, 1746.

  15. Agostino Ramelli. _Le Diverse et artificiose Machine_. Folio.
               Paris, 1588.

  16. Athanasius Kircher. _Magnes sive de Arte Magnetica_. Folio.
               Rome, 1641.

  17. Vaucanson. _An Account of the Mechanism of Automaton or image
               playing on the German Flute_. 4to. London, 1742.

  18. Peter van Musschenbroeck. _Introductio ad Philosophiam
               Naturalem_. 4to. Padua, 1768.

  19. Jacques Ozanam. _Recréations Mathématiques et physiques_.
               8vo. Paris, 1696.

  20. Anonymous, (believed to be by Thomas Powell, D.D.) _Humane
               Industry, or a History of most Manual Arts_.
               Sm. 8vo. London, 1661.

  21. Anonymous, (probably Professor Willis.) _An attempt to Analyse
               the Automaton Chess player of Mr. de Kempelen_. 8vo.
               London, 1821.

  22. Cox’s Museum. _Descriptive Catalogue of the Superb and
               Magnificent pieces of Mechanism and Jewellery in Cox’s
               Museum_. Sm. 4to. London, 1772.

  23. Henry Van Etten, _Mathematicall Recreations_. 12mo. London,
               1633.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




                                 O. V.

                                   A
                              BIBLIOGRAPHY
                                 OF THE
                       PRIVATELY PRINTED OPUSCULA

          _Issued to the Members of the Sette of Odd Volumes_.

   “Books that can be held in the hand, and carried to the fireside,
               are the best after all.”—_Samuel Johnson_.

   “The writings of the wise are the only riches our posterity cannot
                       squander.”—_Charles Lamb_.


  1. =B. Q.=
       A Biographical and Bibliographical Fragment. 22 Pages. Presented
       on November the 5th, 1880, by His Oddship C. W. H. WYMAN. 1st
       Edition limited to 25 copies.
                                   (Subsequently enlarged to 50 copies.)

  2. =Glossographia Anglicana=.
       By the late J. TROTTER BROCKETT, F.S.A., London and Newcastle,
       author of “Glossary of North Country Words,” to which is
       prefixed a Biographical Sketch of the Author by FREDERICK
       BLOOMER. (pp. 94.) Presented on July the 7th, 1882, by His
       Oddship BERNARD QUARITCH.
                                          Edition limited to 150 copies.

  3. =Ye Boke of Ye Odd Volumes=,
       from 1878 to 1883. Carefvlly _Compiled_ and painsfvlly _Edited_
       by ye vnworthy Historiographer to ye Sette, _Brother_ and
       _Vice-President_ WILLIAM MORT THOMPSON, and produced by ye order
       and at ye charges of Hys Oddship ye President and Librarian of
       ye Sette, Bro. BERNARD QUARITCH. (pp. 136.) Presented on April
       the 13th, 1883, by his Oddship BERNARD QUARITCH.
                                          Edition limited to 150 copies.

  4. =Love’s Garland;=
       Or Posies for Rings, Hand-kerchers, & Gloves, and such pretty
       Tokens that Lovers send their Loves. London, 1674. A Reprint.
       And Ye Garland of Ye Odd Volumes, (pp. 102.) Presented on
       October the 12th, 1883, by Bro. JAMES ROBERTS BROWN.
                                          Edition limited to 250 copies.

  5. =Queen Anne Musick=.
       A brief Accompt of ye genuine Article, those who performed ye
       same, and ye Masters in ye facultie. From 1702 to 1714. (pp. 40.)
       Presented on July the 13th, 1883, by Bro. BURNHAM W. HORNER.
                                          Edition limited to 100 copies.

  6. =A Very Odd Dream=.
       Related by His Oddship W. M. THOMPSON, President of the Sette of
       Odd Volumes, at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen Street, on
       June 1st, 1883. (pp. 26.) Presented on July the 13th, 1883, by
       His Oddship W. MORT THOMPSON.
                                          Edition limited to 250 copies.

  7. =Codex Chiromantiae=.
       Being a Compleate Manualle of ye Science and Arte of Expoundynge
       ye Past, ye Presente, ye Future, and ye Charactere, by ye
       Scrutinie of ye Hande, ye Gestures thereof, and ye Chirographie.
       _Codicillus I_.—CHIROGNOMY. (pp. 118.) Presented on November the
       2nd, 1883, by Bro. ED. HERON-ALLEN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  8. =Intaglio Engraving: Past and Present=.
       An Address, by Bro. EDWARD RENTON, delivered at the Freemasons’
       Tavern, Great Queen Street, on December 5th, 1884. (pp. 74.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 200 copies.

  9. =The Rights, Duties, Obligations, and Advantages of Hospitality=.
       An Address by Bro. CORNELIUS WALFORD, F.I.A, F.S.S., F.R. Hist.
       Soc., Barrister-at-Law, Master of the Rolls in the Sette of
       Odd Volumes, delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen
       Street, on Friday, February 5th, 1885. (pp. 72.) Presented to
       the Sette by His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  10. =“Pens, Ink, and Paper:” a Discourse upon Caligraphy=.
       The Implements and Practice of Writing, both Ancient and Modern,
       with Curiosa, and an Appendix of famous English Penmen, by Bro.
       DANIEL W. KETTLE, F.R.G.S., Cosmographer; delivered at the
       Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen Street, on Friday, November 6th,
       1885. (pp. 104.) Presented to the Sette on January 8th, 1886, by
       Bro. DANIEL W. KETTLE.
                                          Edition limited to 233 copies.

  11. =On Some of the Books for Children of the Last Century=.
       With a few Words on the Philanthropic Publisher of St. Paul’s
       Churchyard. A paper read at a Meeting of the Sette of Odd
       Volumes by Brother CHARLES WELSH, Chapman of the Sette, at the
       Freemasons’ Tavern, on Friday, the 8th day of January, 1886.
       (pp. 108.) Presented to the Sette by Bro. CHARLES WELSH.
                                          Edition limited to 250 copies.

  12. =Frost Fairs on the Thames=.
       An Address by Bro. EDWARD WALFORD, M.A., Rhymer to the Sette
       of the Odd Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms, on Friday,
       December 3rd, 1886. (pp. 76.) Presented to the Sette by His
       Oddship GEORGE CLULOW.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  13. =On Coloured Books for Children=.
       By Bro. CHARLES WELSH, Chapman to the Sette. Read before the
       Sette, at Willis’s Rooms, on Friday, the 6th May, 1887. With a
       Catalogue of the Books Exhibited. (pp. 60.) Presented to the
       Sette by Bro. JAMES ROBERTS BROWN.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  14. =A Short Sketch of Liturgical History and Literature=.
       Illustrated by Examples Manuscript and Printed. A Paper read at
       a Meeting of the Sette of Odd Volumes by Bro. BERNARD QUARITCH,
       Librarian and First President of the Sette, at Willis’s Rooms,
       on Friday, June 10th, 1887. (pp. 86.) Presented to the Sette by
       Bro. BERNARD QUARITCH.

  15. =Cornelius Walford: In Memoriam=.
       By his Kinsman, EDWARD WALFORD, M.A., Rhymer to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes. Read before the Sette at Willis’s Rooms, on Friday,
       October 21st, 1887. (pp. 60.) Presented to the Sette by Bro.
       EDWARD WALFORD, M.A.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  16. =The Sweating Sickness=.
       By FREDERICK H. GERVIS, M.R.C.S., Apothecary to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms, on Friday, November 4th,
       1887. (pp. 48.) Presented to the Sette by Bro. FRED. H. GERVIS.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  17. =New Year’s Day in Japan=.
       By Bro. CHARLES HOLME, Pilgrim of the Sette of Odd Volumes. Read
       before the Sette at Willis’s Rooms on Friday, January 6th, 1888.
       (pp. 46.) Presented to the Sette by Bro. CHARLES HOLME.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  18. =Ye Seconde Boke of Ye Odd Volumes=,
       from 1883 to 1888. Carefvlly _Compiled_ and painsfvlly _Edited_
       by ye vnworthy Historiographer to ye Sette, Bro. WILLIAM MORT
       THOMPSON, and produced by ye order and at ye charges of ye
       Sette. (pp. 157.)
                                          Edition limited to 115 copies.

  19. =Repeats and Plagiarisms in Art, 1888=.
       By Bro. JAMES ORROCK, R.I., Connoisseur to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes. Read before the Sette at Willis’s Rooms, St. James’s,
       on Friday, January 4th, 1889. (pp. 33.) Presented to the Sette
       by Bro. JAMES ORROCK, R.I.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  20. =How Dreams Come True=.
       A Dramatic Sketch by Bro. J. TODHUNTER, Bard of the Sette of
       Odd Volumes. Performed at a Conversazione of the Sette at the
       Grosvenor Gallery, on Thursday, July 17th, 1890. (pp. 46.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship Bro. CHARLES HOLME.
                                          Edition limited to 600 copies.

  21. =The Drama in England during the last Three Centuries=.
       By Bro. WALTER HAMILTON, F.R.G.S., Parodist to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes. Read before the Sette at Limmer’s Hotel, on Wednesday,
       January 8th, 1890. (pp. 80.) Presented to the Sette by Bro.
       WALTER HAMILTON.
                                          Edition limited to 201 copies.

  22. =Gilbert, of Colchester=.
       By Bro. SILVANUS P. THOMPSON, D.Sc., B.A., Magnetizer to the
       Sette of Odd Volumes. Read before the Sette at Limmer’s Hotel,
       on Friday, July 4th, 1890. (pp. 63.) Presented to the Sette by
       Bro. SILVANUS P. THOMPSON.
                                          Edition limited to 249 copies.

  23. =Neglected Frescoes in Northern Italy=.
       By Bro. DOUGLAS H. GORDON, Remembrancer to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes. Read before the Sette at Limmer’s Hotel, on Friday,
       December 6th, 1889. (pp. 48.) Presented to the Sette by Bro.
       DOUGLAS H. GORDON.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  24. =Recollections of Robert-Houdin=.
       By Bro. WILLIAM MANNING. Seer to the Sette of Odd Volumes.
       Delivered at a Meeting of the Sette held at Limmer’s Hotel, on
       Friday, December 7th, 1890. (pp. 81.) Presented to the Sette by
       Bro. WILLIAM MANNING.
                                          Edition limited to 205 copies.

  25. =Scottish Witchcraft Trials=.
       By Bro. J. W. BRODIE INNES, Master of the Rolls to the Sette of
       Odd Volumes. Read before the Sette at a Meeting held at Limmer’s
       Hotel, on Friday, November 7th, 1890. (pp. 66.) Presented to the
       Sette by Bro. ALDERMAN TYLER.
                                          Edition limited to 245 copies.

  26. =Blue and White China=.
       By Bro. ALEXANDER T. HOLLINGSWORTH, Artificer to the Sette
       of Odd Volumes. Delivered at a Meeting of the Sette held at
       Limmer’s Hotel, on Friday, February 6th, 1891. (pp. 70.)
       Presented to the Sette by Bro. ALEXANDER T. HOLLINGSWORTH.
                                          Edition limited to 245 copies.

  27. =Reading a Poem=.
       A Forgotten Sketch by WM. M. THACKERAY. Communicated by Bro.
       CHAS. PLUMPTRE JOHNSON (Clerke-atte-Lawe to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes), to the Sette at Limmer’s Hotel, on Friday, May 1st,
       1891. (pp. xi and 66.) Presented to the Sette by Bro. CHAS.
       PLUMPTRE JOHNSON.
                                          Edition limited to 321 copies.

  28. =The Ballades of a Blasé Man=,
       to which are added some Rondeaux of his Rejuvenescence,
       laboriously constructed by the Necromancer to the Sette of
       Odd Volumes, (pp. 88.) Presented to the Sette by Bro. EDWARD
       HERON-ALLEN, in October, 1891.
                                           Edition limited to 99 copies.

  29. =Automata Old and New=.
       By Bro. CONRAD W. COOKE, Mechanick to the Sette of Odd Volumes.
       Read before the Sette at a Meeting held at Limmer’s Hotel, on
       Friday, November 6th, 1891. (pp. 118). Presented to the Sette by
       Bro. CONRAD W. COOKE.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.




YEAR-BOKES.


  I. =The Year-Boke of the Odd Volumes: An Annual Record of the
       Transactions of the Sette. Eleventh Year, 1888-9=.

       Written and compiled by Bro. W. MORT THOMPSON,
       Historiographer to the Sette. Issued November 29th, 1890.


  II. =The Year-Boke of the Odd Volumes: An Annual Record of the
       Transactions of the Sette. Twelfth Year, 1889-90=.

  III. =The Year-Boke of the Odd Volumes: An Annual Record of the
       Transactions of the Sette. Thirteenth Year, 1890-1=.

       Compiled mainly from the Minute Book of the Sette, and
       imprynted for private circulation only.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

[Illustration]




FOLIA.


              ORIGINATED BY BROTHER HOLME, _Pilgrim_, WHO
                     PRESENTED EACH BROTHER WITH A
                           SPECIAL PORTFOLIO.


     =1. The Victualling Crew=. Presented by Bro. HENRY
          MOORE, A.R.A., _Ancient Mariner_.

     =2. Proud Maisie=, from a drawing by Frederick Sandys.
          Presented by Bro. TODHUNTER, _Playwright_.

     =3. A Rainy Day in Hakone, Japan=. Presented by
          Bro. ALFRED EAST, _Landscape Painter_.

     =4. The Shelley Memorial=. Photogravure from the
          original Statue. Presented by E. ONSLOW FORD,
          A.R.A., _Sculptor_.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




MISCELLANIES.


  1. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship, W. M. THOMPSON, Fourth President of the Sette
       of Odd Volumes, delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great
       Queen Street, on his taking office on April 13th, &c. (pp. 31.)
       Printed by order of Ye Sette, and issued on May the 4th, 1883.
                                          Edition limited to 250 copies.

  2. =Codex Chiromantiae=.
       _Appendix A_. Dactylomancy, or Finger-ring Magic, Ancient,
       Mediæval, and Modern, (pp. 34.) Presented on October the 12th,
       1883, by Bro. ED. HERON-ALLEN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  3. =A President’s Persiflage=.
       Spoken by His Oddship W. M. THOMPSON, Fourth President of the
       Sette of Odd Volumes, at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen
       Street, at the Fifty-eighth Meeting of the Sette, on December
       7th, 1883. (pp. 15.)
                                          Edition limited to 250 copies.

  4. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN, Fifth President of the Sette of
       Odd Volumes, delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen
       Street, on his taking office, on April 4th, 1884, &c. (pp. 56.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  5. =Musical London a Century Ago=.
       Compiled from the Raw Material, by Brother BURNHAM W. HORNER,
       F.R.S.L., F.R. Hist. S., Organist of the Sette of Odd Volumes,
       delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen Street, on
       June 6th, 1884. (pp. 32.) Presented to the Sette by His Oddship
       EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  6. =The Unfinished Renaissance;=
       Or, Fifty Years of English Art. By Bro. GEORGE C. HAITÉ, Author
       of “Plant Studies,” &c. Delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern,
       Friday, July 11th, 1884. (pp. 40.) Presented to the Sette by His
       Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  7. =The Pre-Shakespearian Drama=.
       By Bro. FRANK IRESON. Delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern,
       Friday, January 2nd, 1885. (pp. 34.) Presented to the Sette by
       His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  8. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship, Brother JAMES ROBERTS BROWN, Sixth President of
       the Sette of Odd Volumes, delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern,
       Great Queen Street, on his taking office, on April 17th, 1885,
       &c. (pp. 56.) Presented to the Sette by His Oddship JAMES
       ROBERTS BROWN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  9. =Catalogue of Works of Art=
       Exhibited at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen Street, on
       Friday, July 11th, 1884. Lent by Members of the Sette of Odd
       Volumes. Presented to the Sette by His Oddship EDWARD F. WYMAN.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  10. =Catalogue of Manuscripts and Early-Printed Books=
       Exhibited and Described by Bro. B. QUARITCH, the Librarian of
       the Sette of Odd Volumes, at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great Queen
       Street, June 5th, 1885. Presented to the Sette by His Oddship
       JAMES ROBERTS BROWN.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  11. =Catalogue of Old Organ Music=
       Exhibited by Bro. BURNHAM W. HORNER, F.R.S.L., F.R.Hist.S.,
       Organist of the Sette of Odd Volumes, at the Freemasons’ Tavern,
       Great Queen Street, on Friday, February 5th, 1886. Presented to
       the Sette by His Oddship JAMES ROBERTS BROWN.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  12. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship Bro. GEORGE CLULOW, Seventh President of the
       Sette of Odd Volumes, delivered at the Freemasons’ Tavern, Great
       Queen Street, on his taking office, on April 2nd, 1886, &c.
       (pp. 64.) Presented to the Sette by His Oddship GEORGE CLULOW.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  13. =A Few Notes about Arabs=.
       By Bro. CHARLES HOLME, Pilgrim of the Sette of Odd Volumes. Read
       at a Meeting of the “Sette” at Willis’s Rooms, on Friday, May
       7th, 1886. (pp. 46.) Presented to the Sette of Odd Volumes by
       Bro. CHAS. HOLME.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  14. =Account of the Great Learned Societies and Associations, and of
       the Chief Printing Clubs of Great Britain and Ireland= Delivered
       by Bro. BERNARD QUARITCH, Librarian of the Sette of Odd Volumes,
       at Willis’s Rooms on Tuesday, June 8th, 1886. (pp. 66.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship GEORGE CLULOW.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  15. =Report of a Conversazione=
       Given at Willis’s Rooms, King Street, St. James’s, on Tuesday,
       June 8th, 1886, by his Oddship Bro. GEORGE CLULOW, _President_;
       with a summary of an Address on “LEARNED SOCIETIES AND PRINTING
       CLUBS,” then delivered by Bro. BERNARD QUARITCH, _Librarian_. By
       Bro. W. M. THOMPSON, _Historiographer_. Presented to the Sette
       by His Oddship GEORGE CLULOW.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

  16. =Codex Chiromantiae=.
       _Appendix B_.—A DISCOURSE CONCERNING AUTOGRAPHS AND THEIR
       SIGNIFICATIONS. Spoken in valediction at Willis’s Rooms, on
       October the 8th, 1886, by Bro. EDWARD HERON-ALLEN. (pp. 45.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship GEORGE CLULOW.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  17. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship ALFRED J. DAVIES, Eighth President of the Sette
       of Odd Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms, on his taking
       office on April 4th, 1887. (pp. 64.) Presented to the Sette by
       His Oddship ALFRED J. DAVIES.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  18. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship Bro. T. C. VENABLES, Ninth President of the Sette
       of Odd Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms, on his taking
       office on April 6th, 1888. (pp. 54.) Presented to the Sette by
       His Oddship T. C. VENABLES.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  19. =Ye Papyrus Roll-Scroll of Ye Sette of Odd Volumes=.
       By Bro. J. BRODIE-INNES, Master of the Rolls to the Sette of Odd
       Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms, May 4th, 1888. (pp. 39.)
       Presented to the Sette by His Oddship T. C. VENABLES.
                                          Edition limited to 133 copies.

  20. =Inaugural Address=
       of His Oddship Bro. H. J. GORDON ROSS, Tenth President of the
       Sette of Odd Volumes, delivered at Willis’s Rooms. King Street,
       St. James’s Square, on his taking office, April 5th, 1889.
                                          Edition limited to 255 copies.

[Illustration]




                  =WORKS DEDICATED TO THE SETTE=.


                   =The Ancestry of the Violin=.
               London, 1882. EDWARD HERON-ALLEN.

                   =An Odd Volume for Smokers=.
                London, 1889. WALTER HAMILTON.

                        =The Blue Friars=.
                London, 1889. W. H. K. WRIGHT.

                           =Quatrains=.
                London, 1892. W. WILSEY MARTIN.

[Illustration]




=Ye Sette of Odd Volumes=.


  Original Member. 1878. BERNARD QUARITCH, _Librarian_,
                         15, Piccadilly, W.
                         (President, 1878, 1879, and 1882).

  Original Member. 1878. EDWARD RENTON, _Herald_,
                         44, South Hill Park, Hampstead, N.W.
                         (Vice-President, 1880; Secretary, 1882).

  Original Member. 1878. W. MORT THOMPSON, _Historiographer_,
                         16, Carlyle Square, Chelsea, S.W.
                         (Vice-President, 1882; President, 1883).

  Original Member. 1878. CHARLES W. H. WYMAN, _Typographer_,
                         103, King Henry’s Road, Primrose Hill, N.W.
                         (Vice-President, 1878 and 1879; President,
                          1880).

  Original Member. 1878. EDWARD F. WYMAN, _Treasurer_,
                         19, Blomfield Road, Maida Vale, W.
                         (Secretary, 1878 and 1879; President, 1884).

                   1878. ALFRED J. DAVIES, _Attorney-General_,
                         Fairlight, Uxbridge Road, Ealing, W.
                         (Vice-President, 1881; Secretary, 1884;
                          President, 1887).

                   1878. G. R. TYLER, Alderman, late High Sheriff of
                         the City of London, _Stationer_,
                         17, Penywern Road, South Kensington, W.
                         (Vice-President, 1886).

                   1879. T. C. VENABLES, _Antiquary_,
                         9, Marlborough Place, N.W.
                         (President, 1888).

                   1879. JAMES ROBERTS BROWN, _Alchymist_,
                         44, Tregunter Road, South Kensington, W.
                         (Secretary, 1880; Vice-President, 1883;
                         President, 1885).

                   1880. BURNHAM W. HORNER, F.R.S.L., _Organist_,
                         Matson Red House, Richmond Park, Richmond, S.W.
                         (Vice-President, 1889).

                   1882. WILLIAM MURRELL, M.D., _Leech_ (President),
                         17, Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, W.
                        (Secretary, 1883; Vice-President, 1885).

                   1883. HENRY GEORGE LILEY, _Art Director_,
                         Radnor House, Radnor Place, Hyde Park, W.

                   1883. GEORGE CHARLES HAITÉ, F.L.S., _Art Critic_,
                         Ormsby Lodge, The Avenue, Bedford Park, W.
                         (Vice-President, 1887; President, 1891).

                   1883. EDWARD HERON-ALLEN, _Necromancer_,
                         (Vice-President),
                         3, Northwick Terrace, N.W. (Secretary, 1885).

                   1884. WILFRID BALL, R. P. E., _Painter-Etcher_,
                         4, Albemarle Street, W.
                         (Master of Ceremonies, 1890; Vice-President,
                         1891).

                   1884. DANIEL W. KETTLE, F.R.G.S., _Cosmographer_,
                         Hayes Common, near Beckenham, Kent
                        (Secretary, 1886).

                   1884. CHARLES WELSH, _Chapman_,
                         The Poplars, Forest Lane, Walthamstow
                         (Vice-President, 1888).

                   1886. CHARLES HOLME, F.L.S., _Pilgrim_,
                         The Red House, Bexley Heath, Kent
                         (Secretary, 1887; President, 1890).

                   1886. FREDK. H. GERVIS, M. R.C.S., _Apothecary_,
                         1, Fellows Road, Haverstock Hill, N.W.

                   1887. JOHN W. BRODIE-INNES, _Master of the Rolls_,
                         14, Dublin Street, Edinburgh
                         (Secretary, 1888).

                   1887. HENRY MOORE, A.R.A., _Ancient Mariner_,
                         Collingham, Maresfield Gardens, N.W.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




           Supplemental Odd Volumes.


  1887. JAMES ORROCK, R.I., _Connoisseur_,
        48, Bedford Square, W.C.

  1888. ALFRED EAST, R.I., _Landscape Painter_;
        14, Adamson Road, Belsize Park, N.W.

  1888. WALTER HAMILTON, _Parodist_,
        Keeper of the Archives,
        Ellarbee, Elms Road, Clapham Common, S.W.

  1888. DOUGLAS H. GORDON, _Remembrancer_,
        (Master of Ceremonies),
        41, Tedworth Square, S.W. (Secretary, 1889).

  1888. ALEXANDER T. HOLLINGSWORTH, _Artificer_,
        172, Sutherland Avenue, Maida Vale, W.
        (Vice-President, 1890).

  1888. JOHN LANE, _Bibliographer_,
        37, Southwick Street, Hyde Park, W.
        (Odd Councillor, 1891; Secretary, 1890;
        Master of Ceremonies, 1891).

  1888. JOHN TODHUNTER, M.D., _Playwright_ (Secretary),
        Orchard Croft, The Orchard, Bedford Park, W.

  1889. FRANCIS ELGAR, LL.D., _Shipwright_,
        113, Cannon Street, E.C.

  1889. WILLIAM MANNING, _Seer_,
        21, Redcliffe Gardens, S.W.
        (Secretary, 1891; Odd Councillor).

  1890. SILVANUS P. THOMPSON, D.Sc., F.R.S., _Magnetizer_,
        Morland, Chislett Road, N.W.

  1890. CONRAD W. COOKE, _Mechanick_,
        The Lindens, Larkhall Rise, S.W.

  1890. E. ONSLOW FORD, A.R.A., _Sculptor_,
        62, Acacia Road, N.W.

  1891. CHARLES PLUMPTRE JOHNSON, _Clerke at Law_ (Auditor),
        23, Cork Street, W.

  1891. FREDERIC VILLIERS, _War Correspondent_, Mashrabeyah,
        65, Chancery Lane, W.C.

  1891. MARCUS B. HUISH, LL.B., _Arts-man_,
        21, Essex Villas, Phillimore Gardens, W.

  1892. W. WILSEY MARTIN, F.R.G.S., _Laureate_,
        15, Delamere Terrace, W.

  1892. HERBERT WARD, _Wanderer_,
        Shepherd Hill House, near Rickmansworth.

  1892. FREDERICK YORK POWELL, _Ignoramus_,
        The Corner, Priory Road, Bedford Park, W.

  1892. ERNEST CLARKE, _Yeoman_,
        10, Addison Road, Bedford Park, W.

  1892. PAUL BEVAN, _Ready Reckoner_,
        46, Queen’s Gate Terrace, S.W.

  1892. MAX PEMBERTON, _Hack_,
        34, Clifton Hill, St. John’s Wood, N.W.


[Illustration]

[Illustration]

                CHISWICK PRESS:——C. WHITTINGHAM AND CO.,
                      TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE.





End of Project Gutenberg's Automata Old and New, by Conrad William Cooke

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 55817 ***
