*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 68991 ***

Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  A single underscore after a symbol indicates a subscript.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Illustrations have been moved so they do not break up paragraphs.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.




                  GIANT BRAINS
                       OR
               MACHINES THAT THINK

             EDMUND CALLIS BERKELEY

         Consultant in Modern Technology
    President, E. C. Berkeley and Associates

        JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., NEW YORK
         CHAPMAN & HALL, LIMITED, LONDON

                 Copyright, 1949
                       by
             EDMUND CALLIS BERKELEY

              _All Rights Reserved_

     _This book or any part thereof must not
        be reproduced in any form without
    the written permission of the publisher._

         Second Printing, February, 1950
     Printed in the United States of America

                 To my friends,
           whose help and instruction
             made this book possible




PREFACE

The Subject, Purpose, and Method of this Book


The subject of this book is a type of machine that comes closer to
being a brain that thinks than any machine ever did before 1940. These
new machines are called sometimes mechanical brains and sometimes
sequence-controlled calculators and sometimes by other names.
Essentially, though, they are machines that can handle information with
great skill and great speed. And that power is very similar to the
power of a brain.

These new machines are important. They do the work of hundreds of human
beings for the wages of a dozen. They are powerful instruments for
obtaining new knowledge. They apply in science, business, government,
and other activities. They apply in reasoning and computing, and, the
harder the problem, the more useful they are. Along with the release of
atomic energy, they are one of the great achievements of the present
century. No one can afford to be unaware of their significance.

In this book I have sought to tell a part of the story of these new
machines that think. Perhaps you, as you start this book, may not agree
with me that a machine can think: the first chapter of this book is
devoted to the discussion of this question.

My purpose has been to tell enough about these machines so that we
can see in general how they work. I have sought to explain some
giant brains that have been built and to show how they do thinking
operations. I have sought also to talk about what these machines can do
in the future and to judge their significance for us. It seems to me
that they will take a load off men’s as great as the load that printing
took off men’s writing: a tremendous burden lifted.

We need to examine several of the new mechanical brains: Massachusetts
Institute of Technology’s differential analyzer, Harvard’s IBM
automatic sequence-controlled calculator, Moore School’s ENIAC
(Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator), and Bell Laboratories’
general-purpose relay calculator. These are described in the sequence in
which they were finished between the years 1942 and 1946.

We also have to go on some excursions—for instance, the nature of
language and of symbols, the meaning of thinking, the human brain and
nervous system, the future design of machinery that can think, and a
little algebra and logic. I have also sought to discuss the relations
between machines that think and human society—what we can foresee as
likely to happen or be needed as a result of the remarkable invention
of machines that can think.


READING THIS BOOK

This book is intended for everyone. I have sought to put it together in
such a way that any reader can select from it what he wants.

Perhaps at first reading you want only the main thread of the story.
Then read only what seems interesting, and skip whatever seems
uninteresting. The subheadings should help to tell you what to read and
what to skip. Nearly all the chapters can be read with little reference
to what goes before, although some reference to the supplements in the
back may at times be useful.

Perhaps your memory of physics is dim, like mine. The little knowledge
of physics needed is explained here and there throughout the book, and
the index should tell where to find any explanation you may want.

Perhaps it is a long time since you did any algebra. Then Supplement
2 on mathematics may hold something of use to you. Two sections (one
in Chapter 5 and one in Chapter 6) labeled as containing some rather
mathematical details may be skipped with no great loss.

Perhaps you are unacquainted with logic that uses symbols—the branch of
logic called mathematical logic. In fact, very few people are familiar
with it. No discussion in the book hinges on understanding this
subject, except for Chapter 9 where a machine that calculates logical
truth is described. In all other chapters you may freely skip all
references to mathematical logic. But, if you are curious about the
subject and how it can be usefully applied in the field of mechanical
brains, then begin with the introduction to the subject in Chapter 9,
and note the suggestions in the section entitled “Algebra of Logic” in
Supplement 2.

In any case, glance at the table of contents, the chapter headings and
subheadings, and the supplements at the back. These should give an idea
of how the book is put together and how you may select what may be
interesting to you.

Please do not read this book straight from beginning to end unless
that way proves to be congenial to you. If you are not interested in
technical details, skip most of the middle chapters, which describe
existing mechanical brains. If, on the other hand, you want more
details than this book contains, look up references in Supplement
3. Here are listed, with a few comments, over 250 books, articles,
and pamphlets related to the subject of machinery for computing and
reasoning. These cover many parts of the field; some parts, however,
are not yet covered by any published information.

There are no photographs in this book, although there are over 80
drawings. Photographs of these complicated machines can really show
very little: panels, lights, switches, wires, and other kinds of
hardware. What is important is the way the machine works inside. This
cannot be shown by a photograph but may be shown by schematic drawings.
In the same way, a photograph of a human being shows almost nothing
about how he thinks.


UNDERSTANDING THIS BOOK

I have tried to write this book so that it could be understood. I have
attempted to explain machinery for computing and reasoning without
using technical words any more than necessary. To do this seemed to be
easy in some places, much harder in others. As a test of this attempt,
a count has been made of all the different words in the book that have
two syllables or more, that are used for explaining, and that are
not themselves defined. There are fewer than 1800 of these words. In
Supplement 1, entitled “Words and Ideas,” I have digressed to discuss
further the problem of explanation and understanding.

Every now and then in the book, along comes a word or a phrase that
has a special meaning, for example, the name of something new. When it
first appears, it is put in italics and is explained or defined. In
addition, all the words and phrases having special meaning appear again
in the index, and next to each is the page number of its explanation or
definition.

In many places, I have talked of mechanical brains as if they were
living. For example, instead of “capacity to store information” I have
spoken of “memory.” Of course, the machines are not living; but they do
have individuality, responsiveness, and other traits of living beings,
just as a political party pictured as a living elephant does. Besides,
to treat things as persons is a help in making any subject vivid and
understandable, as every song writer and cartoonist illustrates.
We speak of “Old Man River” and “Father Time”; we may speak of a
ship or a locomotive as “she”; and the crew on the first Harvard
sequence-controlled calculator has often called her “Bessy, the Bessel
engine.”

Let us pause a little longer on the subject of understanding. What
is the understanding of something new? It is a state of knowing, a
process of knowing more and more. The more we know about something
new, the better we understand it. It is possible for almost anybody to
understand almost anything, I believe. What is mainly needed in order
to grasp an idea is a good collection of true statements about it and
some practice in using those statements in situations. For example,
no one has ever seen or touched the separate scraps of electricity
called electrons. But electrons have been described and measured;
hundreds of thousands of people work with electrons; they know and use
true statements about electrons. In effect, these people understand
electrons.

Probably the hardest task of an author is to make his statements
understandable yet accurate. It is too much to hope for complete
success. I shall be very grateful to any reader who points out to me
the statements that he has not understood or that are in error.

As to the views I have expressed, I do not expect every reader to agree
with me. In fact, I shall be glad if many a reader disagrees with
me. For then someone else may say to both of us, “You’re both right
and both wrong—the truth lies atwixt and atween you.” Thoughtful and
tolerant disagreement is the finest climate for scientific progress.


BASIC FACTS

Many of the mechanical brains described in this book will do good work
for years; but their design is already out of date. Many organizations
are hard at work finding new tricks in electronics, materials, and
engineering and making new mechanical brains that are better and faster.

In spite of future developments, though, the basic facts about
mechanical brains will endure. These basic facts are drawn from the
principles of thinking, of mathematics, of science, of engineering,
etc. These facts govern all handling of information. They do not depend
very much on human or mechanical energy. They do not depend very much
on signs. They do not depend very much on the century, or the language,
or the country. For example, “II et III V sunt,” the Romans may have
said; “deux et trois font cinq,” say the French; “2 + 3 = 5,” say the
mathematicians; and we say, “two and three make five.” The main effort
in this book has been to make clear the basic facts about mechanical
brains, for they are now a masterly instrument for obtaining new
knowledge.

                                    EDMUND CALLIS BERKELEY

    New York 11, N. Y.
    _June 30, 1949_




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This book has been over seven years in the making and has evolved
through many different plans for its contents. It springs essentially
from the desire to see human beings use their knowledge better: we
know enough, but how are we to use what we know? Machines that handle
information, that make knowledge accessible, are a long step in the
direction of using what we know.

For help in causing this desire to come to fruition, I should like
to express my indebtedness especially to Professor (then Commander,
U.S.N.R.) Howard H. Aiken of Harvard University, whose stimulus, while
I was stationed for ten months in 1945-46 in his laboratory, was very
great.

I should also like to express my appreciation to Mr. Harry J. Volk,
whose vision and enthusiasm greatly encouraged me in the writing of
this book.

For careful reviews and helpful comments on the chapters dealing with
existing mechanical brains, I am especially grateful to Dr. Franz
L. Alt, Mr. E. G. Andrews, Professor Samuel H. Caldwell, Dr. Grace
M. Hopper, Mr. Theodore A. Kalin, and Dr. John W. Mauchly, who are
experts in their fields. Dr. Ruth P. Berkeley, Dr. Rudolf Flesch, Mr.
J. Ross Macdonald, Dr. Z. I. Mosesson, Mr. Irving Rosenthal, Mr. Max
S. Weinstein, and many others have been true friends in reading and
commenting upon many parts of the manuscript. Mr. Frank W. Keller
devoted much time and skill to converting my rough sketches into
illustrations. Mr. Murray B. Ritterman has been of invaluable help in
preparing and checking much of the bibliography. Miss Marjorie L. Black
has helped very greatly in turning scraps of paper bearing sentences
into an excellent manuscript for the printer.

For permission to use the quotations on various pages in Chapters 11
and 12, I am indebted to the kindness of:

    E. P. Dutton & Co., for quotations from
        _Frankenstein_, by Mary W. Shelley,
        Everyman’s Library, No. 616.

    Samuel French, for quotations from _R. U. R._,
        by Karel Čapek.[1]

    _Modern Industry_, for a quotation from the
        issue of February 15, 1947.

[1] Copyright 1923 by Doubleday, Page and Co.; all rights reserved;
quotations reprinted by permission of Karel Čapek and Samuel French.

Responsibility for the statements and opinions expressed in this book
is solely my own. These statements and opinions do not necessarily
represent the views of any organization with which I may be or have
been associated. To the best of my knowledge and belief no information
contained in this book is classified by the Department of Defense of
the United States.

    EDMUND CALLIS BERKELEY




CONTENTS


    1. CAN MACHINES THINK?
          What Is a Mechanical Brain?                                1

    2. LANGUAGES:
          Systems for Handling Information                          10

    3. A MACHINE THAT WILL THINK:
          The Design of a Very Simple Mechanical Brain              22

    4. COUNTING HOLES:
          Punch-Card Calculating Machines                           42

    5. MEASURING:
          Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Differential
          Analyzer No. 2                                            65

    6. ACCURACY TO 23 DIGITS:
          Harvard’s IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator    89

    7. SPEED—5000 ADDITIONS A SECOND:
          Moore School’s ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator
          and Calculator)                                          113

    8. RELIABILITY—NO WRONG RESULTS:
          Bell Laboratories’ General-Purpose Relay Calculator      128

    9. REASONING:
          The Kalin-Burkhart Logical-Truth Calculator              144

    10. AN EXCURSION:
          The Future Design of Machines That Think                 167

    11. THE FUTURE:
          Machines That Think, and What They Might Do for Men      180

    12. SOCIAL CONTROL:
           Machines That Think, and How Society May Control Them   196

        SUPPLEMENTS
           1. Words and Ideas                                      209
           2. Mathematics                                          214
           3. References                                           228

        INDEX                                                      257




Chapter 1

CAN MACHINES THINK?

WHAT IS A MECHANICAL BRAIN?


Recently there has been a good deal of news about strange giant
machines that can handle information with vast speed and skill. They
calculate and they reason. Some of them are cleverer than others—able
to do more kinds of problems. Some are extremely fast: one of them does
5000 additions a second for hours or days, as may be needed. Where they
apply, they find answers to problems much faster and more accurately
than human beings can; and so they can solve problems that a man’s life
is far too short to permit him to do. That is why they were built.

These machines are similar to what a brain would be if it were made of
hardware and wire instead of flesh and nerves. It is therefore natural
to call these machines _mechanical brains_. Also, since their powers
are like those of a giant, we may call them _giant brains_.

Several giant mechanical brains are now at work finding out
answers never before known. Two are in Cambridge, Mass.; one is
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and one at Harvard
University. Two are in Aberdeen, Md., at the Army’s Ballistic Research
Laboratories. These four machines were finished in the period 1942
to 1946 and are described in later chapters of this book. More giant
brains are being constructed.

Can we say that these machines really think? What do we mean by
thinking, and how does the human brain think?


HUMAN THINKING

We do not know very much about the physical process of thinking in the
human brain. If you ask a scientist how flesh and blood in a human
brain can think, he will talk to you a little about nerves and about
electrical and chemical changes, but he will not be able to tell you
very much about how we add 2 and 3 and make 5. What men know about the
way in which a human brain thinks can be put down in a few pages, and
what men do not know would fill many libraries.

Injuries to brains have shown some things of importance; for example,
they have shown that certain parts of the brain have certain duties.
There is a part of the brain, for instance, where sights are recorded
and compared. If an accident damages the part of the brain where
certain information is stored, the human being has to relearn—haltingly
and badly—the information destroyed.

We know also that thinking in the human brain is done essentially by a
process of storing information and then referring to it, by a process
of learning and remembering. We know that there are no little wheels
in the brain so that a wheel standing at 2 can be turned 3 more steps
and the result of 5 read. Instead, you and I store the information that
2 and 3 are 5, and store it in such a way that we can give the answer
when questioned. But we do not know the register in our brain where
this particular piece of information is stored. Nor do we know how,
when we are questioned, we are able automatically to pick up the nerve
channels that lead into this register, get the answer, and report it.

Since there are many nerves in the brain, about 10 billion of them, in
fact, we are certain that the network of connecting nerves is a main
part of the puzzle. We are therefore much interested in nerves and
their properties.


NERVES AND THEIR PROPERTIES

A single nerve, or _nerve cell_, consists of a _cell nucleus_ and
a _fiber_. This fiber may have a length of anything from a small
fraction of an inch up to several feet. In the laboratory, successive
impulses can be sent along a nerve fiber as often as 1000 a second.
Impulses can travel along a nerve fiber in either direction at a rate
from 3 feet to 300 feet a second. Because the speed of the impulse
is far less than 186,000 miles a second—the speed of an electric
current—the impulse in the nerve is thought by some investigators to be
more chemical than electrical.

We know that a nerve cell has what is called an _all-or-none response_,
like the trigger of a gun. If you stimulate the nerve up to a certain
point, nothing will happen; if you reach that point, or cross
it,—bang!—the nerve responds and sends out an impulse. The strength of
the impulse, like the shot of the gun, has no relation whatever to the
amount of the stimulation.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Scheme of a nerve cell.]

The structure between the end of one nerve and the beginning of the
next is called a _synapse_ (see Fig. 1). No one really knows very much
about synapses, for they are extremely small and it is not easy to tell
where a synapse stops and other stuff begins. Impulses travel through
synapses in from ½ to 3 thousandths of a second. An impulse travels
through a synapse only in one direction, from the head (or _axon_) of
one nerve fiber to the foot (or _dendrite_) of another. It seems clear
that the activity in a synapse is chemical. When the head of a nerve
fiber brings in an impulse to a synapse, apparently a chemical called
_acetylcholine_ is released and may affect the foot of another fiber,
thus transmitting the impulse; but the process and the conditions for
it are still not well understood.

It is thought that nearly all information is handled in the brain
by groups of nerves in parallel paths. For example, the eye is
estimated to have about 100 million nerves sensitive to light, and the
information that they gather is reported by about 1 million nerves to
the part of the brain that stores sights.

Not much more is yet known, however, about the operation of handling
information in a human brain. We do not yet know how the nerves are
connected so that we can do what we do. Probably the greatest obstacle
to knowledge is that so far we cannot observe the detailed structure of
a living human brain while it performs, without hurting or killing it.


BEHAVIOR THAT IS THINKING

Therefore, we cannot yet tell what thinking is by observing precisely
how a human brain does it. Instead, we have to define thinking by
describing the kind of behavior that we call thinking. Let us consider
some examples.

When you and I add 12 and 8 and make 20, we are thinking. We use our
minds and our understanding to count 8 places forward from 12, for
example, and finish with 20. If we could find a dog or a horse that
could add numbers and tell answers, we would certainly say that the
animal could think.

With no trouble a machine can do this. An ordinary 10-column adding
machine can be given two numbers like 1,378,917,766 and 2,355,799,867
and the instruction to add them. The machine will then give the answer,
3,734,717,633, much faster than a man. In fact, the mechanical brain at
Harvard can add a number of 23 digits to another number of 23 digits
and get the right answer in ³/₁₀ of a second.

Or, suppose that you are walking along a road and come to a fork. If
you stop, read the signpost, and then choose left or right, you are
thinking. You know beforehand where you want to go, you compare your
destination with what the signpost says, and you decide on your route.
This is an operation of logical choice.

A machine can do this. The mechanical brain now at Aberdeen which was
built at Bell Laboratories can examine any number that comes up in the
process of a calculation and tell whether it is bigger than 3 (or any
stated number) or smaller. If the number is bigger than 3, the machine
will choose one process; if the number is smaller than 3, the machine
will choose another process.

Now suppose that we consider the basic operation of all thinking: in
the human brain it is called learning and remembering, and in a machine
it is called storing information and then referring to it. For example,
suppose you want to find 305 Main Street in Kalamazoo. You look up a
map of Kalamazoo; the map is information kindly stored by other people
for your use. When you study the map, notice the streets and the
numbering, and then find where the house should be, you are thinking.

A machine can do this. In the Bell Laboratories’ mechanical brain, for
example, the map could be stored as a long list of the blocks of the
city and the streets and numbers that apply to each block. The machine
will then hunt for the city block that contains 305 Main Street and
report it when found.

A machine can handle information; it can calculate, conclude, and
choose; it can perform reasonable operations with information. A
machine, therefore, can think.


THE DEFINITION OF A MECHANICAL BRAIN

Now when we speak of a machine that thinks, or a mechanical brain, what
do we mean? Essentially, a _mechanical brain_ is a machine that handles
information, transfers information automatically from one part of the
machine to another, and has a flexible control over the sequence of its
operations. No human being is needed around such a machine to pick up
a physical piece of information produced in one part of the machine,
personally move it to another part of the machine, and there put it in
again. Nor is any human being needed to give the machine instructions
from minute to minute. Instead, we can write out the whole program to
solve a problem, translate the program into machine language, and put
the program into the machine. Then we press the “start” button; the
machine starts whirring; and it prints out the answers as it obtains
them. Machines that handle information have existed for more than 2000
years. These two properties are new, however, and make a deep break
with the past.

How should we imagine a mechanical brain? One way to think of a
mechanical brain is shown in Fig. 2. We see here a railroad line with
four stations, marked _input_, _storage_, _computer_, and _output_.
These stations are joined by little gates or switches to the main
railroad line. We can imagine that numbers and other information move
along this railroad line, loaded in freight cars. _Input_ and _output_
are stations where numbers or other information go in and come out,
respectively. _Storage_ is a station where there are many platforms and
where information can be stored. The _computer_ is a special station
somewhat like a factory; when two numbers are loaded on platforms 1 and
2 of this station and an order is loaded on platform 3, then another
number is produced on platform 4.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Scheme of a mechanical brain.]

We see also a tower, marked _control_. This tower runs a telegraph line
to each of its little watchmen standing by the gates. The tower tells
them when to open and when to shut which gates.

Now we can see that, just as soon as the right gates are shut, freight
cars of information can move between stations. Actually the freight
cars move at the speed of electric current, thousands of miles a
second. So, by closing the right gates each fraction of a second,
we can flash numbers and information through the system and perform
operations of reasoning. Thus we obtain a mechanical brain.

In general, a mechanical brain is made up of:

    1. A quantity of registers where information (numbers and
       instructions) can be stored.

    2. Channels along which information can be sent.

    3. Mechanisms that can carry out arithmetical and logical
       operations.

    4. A control, which guides the machine to perform a sequence
       of operations.

    5. Input and output devices, whereby information can go
       into the machine and come out of it.

    6. Motors or electricity, which provide energy.


THE KINDS OF THINKING A MECHANICAL BRAIN CAN DO

There are many kinds of thinking that mechanical brains can do. Among
other things, they can:

     1. Learn what you tell them.
     2. Apply the instructions when needed.
     3. Read and remember numbers.
     4. Add, subtract, multiply, divide, and round off.
     5. Look up numbers in tables.
     6. Look at a result, and make a choice.
     7. Do long chains of these operations one after another.
     8. Write out an answer.
     9. Make sure the answer is right.
    10. Know that one problem is finished, and turn to another.
    11. Determine _most_ of their own instructions.
    12. Work unattended.

They do these things much better than you or I. They are fast. The
mechanical brain built at the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at
the University of Pennsylvania does 5000 additions a second. They are
reliable. Even with hundreds of thousands of parts, the existing giant
brains have worked successfully. They have remarkably few mechanical
troubles; in fact, for one of the giant brains, a mechanical failure
is of the order of once a month. They are powerful. The big machine
at Harvard can remember 72 numbers each of 23 digits at one time and
can do 3 operations with these numbers every second. The mechanical
brains that have been finished are able to solve problems that have
baffled men for many, many years, and they think in ways never open to
men before. Mechanical brains have removed the limits on complexity of
routine: the machine can carry out a complicated routine as easily as
a simple one. Already, processes for solving problems are being worked
out so that the mechanical brain will itself determine more than 99 per
cent of all the routine orders that it is to carry out.

But, you may ask, can they do any kind of thinking? The answer is no.
No mechanical brain so far built can:

    1. Do intuitive thinking.
    2. Make bright guesses, and leap to conclusions.
    3. Determine _all_ its own instructions.
    4. Perceive complex situations outside itself and interpret them.

A clever wild animal, for example, a fox, can do all these things; a
mechanical brain, not yet. There is, however, good reason to believe
that most, if not all, of these operations will in the future be
performed not only by animals but also by machines. Men have only just
begun to construct mechanical brains. All those finished are children;
they have all been born since 1940. Soon there will be much more
remarkable giant brains.


WHY ARE THESE GIANT BRAINS IMPORTANT?

Most of the thinking so far done by these machines is with numbers.
They have already solved problems in airplane design, astronomy,
physics, mathematics, engineering, and many other sciences, that
previously could not be solved. To find the solutions of these
problems, mathematicians would have had to work for years and years,
using the best known methods and large staffs of human computers.

These mechanical brains not only calculate, however. They also remember
and reason, and thus they promise to solve some very important human
problems. For example, one of these problems is the application of what
mankind knows. It takes too long to find understandable information
on a subject. The libraries are full of books: most of them we can
never hope to read in our lifetime. The technical journals are full of
condensed scientific information: they can hardly be understood by you
and me. There is a big gap between somebody’s knowing something and
employment of that knowledge by you or me when we need it. But these
new mechanical brains handle information very swiftly. In a few years
machines will probably be made that will know what is in libraries and
that will tell very swiftly where to find certain information. Thus
we can see that mechanical brains are one of the great new tools for
finding out what we do not know and applying what we do know.




Chapter 2

LANGUAGES:

SYSTEMS FOR HANDLING INFORMATION


As everyone knows, it is not always easy to think. By _thinking_,
we mean computing, reasoning, and other handling of information. By
_information_ we mean collections of ideas—physically, collections of
marks that have meaning. By _handling_ information, we mean proceeding
logically from some ideas to other ideas—physically, changing from
some marks to other marks in ways that have meaning. For example, one
of your hands can express an idea: it can store the number 3 for a
short while by turning 3 fingers up and 2 down. In the same way, a
machine can express an idea: it can store information by arranging some
equipment. The Harvard mechanical brain can store 132 numbers between
0 and 99,999,999,999,999,999,999,999 for days. When you want to change
the number stored by your fingers, you move them: perhaps you need a
half second to change the number stored by your fingers from 3 to 2,
for example. In the same way, a machine can change a stored number by
changing the arrangement of some equipment: the electronic brain Eniac
can change a stored number in ¹/₅₀₀₀ of a second.


LANGUAGES

Since it is not always easy to think, men have given much attention to
devices for making thinking easier. They have worked out many _systems
for handling information_, which we often call _languages_. Some
languages are very complete and versatile and of great importance.
Others cover only a narrow field—such as numbers alone—but in this
field they may be remarkably efficient. Just what is a language?

Every language is both a _scheme for expressing meanings_ and _physical
equipment_ that can be handled. For example, let us take _spoken
English_. The scheme of spoken English consists of more than 150,000
words expressing meanings, and some rules for putting words together
meaningfully. The physical equipment of spoken English consists of
(1) sounds in the air, and (2) the ears of millions of people, and
their mouths and voices, by which they can hear and speak the sounds
of English. For another example, let us take numbers expressed in
the _Arabic numerals_ and the rules of arithmetic. The scheme of
this language contains only ten digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
or their equivalents, and some rules for combining them. Sufficient
physical equipment for this language might very well be a ten-column
desk calculating machine with its counter wheels, gears, keys, etc. If
we tried to exchange the physical equipment of these two languages, we
would be blocked: the desk calculating machine cannot possibly express
the meaningful combinations of 150,000 words, and sounds in the air
are not permanent enough to express the steps of division of one large
number by another.


SCHEMES FOR EXPRESSING MEANINGS

If we examine languages that have existed, we can observe a number of
schemes for expressing meanings. In the table on pp. 12-13 is a rough
list of a dozen of them. From among these we can choose the schemes
that are likely to be useful in mechanical brains. Schemes 11 and 12
are the schemes that have been predominantly used in machinery for
computing. Scheme 12 consisting of combinations of just two marks,
✓, ✕, provides one of the best codes for mechanical handling of
information. This scheme, called _binary coding_ (see Supplement 2), is
also useful for measuring the quantity of information.


QUANTITY OF INFORMATION

How should we measure the quantity of information? The smallest unit
of information is a “yes” or a “no,” a check mark (✓) or a cross (✕),
an impulse in a nerve or no impulse, a 1 or a 0, black or white,
good or bad, etc. This twofold difference is called a _binary digit_
of information (see Supplement 2). It is the convenient _unit of
information_.


SCHEMES FOR EXPRESSING MEANINGS

                                      EXAMPLE:
                        /————————————————^—————————————————\
         PRINCIPLE      SIGN       USED IN      SIGNIFICANCE    NAME OF
    NO.  OF SCHEME                                              SCHEME
    (1)    (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)
                                      _Sounds_
     1. Sound of new  Bobwhite[2] Spoken        kind of quail, Imitative;
        word is like              English         so called      bowwow
         sound of                               from its note    theory
         referent

     2. An utterance  Pooh![2]    Spoken        The speaker     Pooh-pooh
         becomes a                English        expresses       theory
         new word                                 disdain

     3. New word is   Chortle[2] Spoken         “Chuckle”      Analogical
        like another             English;          and
          word                   invented by     “snort”
                                 Lewis Carroll,  blended
                                    1896

     4. Word has      Mother[2]  Spoken          Female        Historical
        been used                English         parent
        through
        the ages

                                      _Sights_
     5. Picture       [picture   Egyptian;       Picture of  Imitative;
        is like         of eye]   Ojibwa          eye and    pictographic
        referent                (American        tears, to
                                  Indian)        mean grief

     6. Pattern is      5         English;       Five;      Ideographic;
         symbol of                French;        cinq;      mathematical;
          an idea                 German;        fünf;       symbolic;
                                    etc.          etc.        numeric

                                  _Mapping of Sounds_
     7. Object        [picture    Possible       Picture of   Rebus-
        pictured       of knot]    English       a knot to      writing;
         has the                                 mean “not”  phonographic
         wanted
         sound

     8. Pattern is    [picture    Ancient        Sign for     Syllable-
        symbol for     of star]   Cypriote         the          writing
         a large                (island of       syllable
        sound unit                Cyprus)        _mu_


     9. Pattern is      Ʒ       International     The sound    Phonetic
        symbol for                 Phonetic       _zh_, as       writing
         a small                 Alphabet of       _s_ in      alphabetic
        sound unit              87 characters     “measure”      writing;

                             _Mapping of Sights or Symbols_
    10. Systematic    ENIAC     Abbreviations,    Initial     Alphabetic
       combinations                 etc.          letters      coding
          of 26                                    of a
         letters                                  5-word
                                                   title

    11.  Systematic    135-03-1228  Abbreviations,  Social    Numeric
        combinations                nomenclature,  Security   coding
        of 10 digits                    etc.        No. of
                                                   a person

    12.  Systematic   ✓,✕,✕,✓,✓ Checking       “yes,”     Binary
         combinations                lists,         “no,”     coding
         of 2 marks                   etc.          “no,”
                                                    “yes,”
                                                    “yes,”
                                                  respectively

[2] The preceding word is the spoken word, not the written one.

With 2 units of information or 2 binary digits (1 or 0) we can
represent 4 pieces of information:

    00, 01, 10, 11

With 3 units of information we can represent 8 pieces of information:

    000, 001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111

With 4 units of information we can represent 16 pieces of information:

    0000 0001 0010 0011
    0100 0101 0110 0111
    1000 1001 1010 1011
    1100 1101 1110 1111

Now 4 units of information are sufficient to represent a _decimal
digit_ 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and allow 6 possibilities to be
left over; 3 units of information are not sufficient. For example, we
may have:

    0 0000      5 0101
    1 0001      6 0110
    2 0010      7 0111
    3 0011      8 1000
    4 0100      9 1001

We say, therefore, that a decimal digit 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 is
_equivalent_ to 4 units of information. Thus a table containing 10,000
numbers, each of 10 decimal digits, is equivalent to 400,000 units of
information.

One of the 26 letters of the alphabet is equivalent to 5 units
of information, for, 5 binary digits (1 or 0) have 32 possible
arrangements, and these are enough to provide for the 26 letters. Any
printed information in English can be expressed in about 80 characters
consisting of 10 numerals, 52 capital and small letters, and some 18
punctuation marks and other types of marks; 6 binary digits (1 or 0)
have 64 possible arrangements, and 7 binary digits (1 or 0) have 128
possible arrangements. Each character in a printed book, therefore, is
roughly equivalent to 7 units of information.

It can be determined that a big telephone book or a big reference
dictionary stores printed information at the rate of about 1 billion
units of information per cubic foot. If the 10 billion nerves in the
human brain could independently be impulsed or not impulsed, then the
human brain could conceivably store 10 billion units of information.
The largest library in the world is the Library of Congress, containing
7 million volumes including pamphlets. It stores about 100 trillion
units of information.

We can thus see the significance of a _quantity of information_ from
1 unit to 100 trillion units. No distinction is here made between
information that reports facts and information that does not. For
example, a book of fiction about persons who never existed is
still counted as information, and, of course, much instruction and
entertainment may be found in such a source.


PHYSICAL EQUIPMENT FOR HANDLING INFORMATION

The first thing we want to do with information is _store_ it. The
second thing we want to do is _combine_ it. We want equipment that
makes these two processes easy and efficient. We want equipment for
handling information that:

    1. Costs little.

    2. Holds much information in little space.

    3. Is _permanent_, when we want to keep the information.

    4. Is _erasable_, when we want to remove information.

    5. Is _versatile_, holds easily any kind of information,
       and allows operations to be done easily.

The amount of human effort needed to handle information correctly
depends very much on the properties of the physical equipment
expressing the information, although the laws of correct reasoning are
independent of the equipment. For example, the great difficulty with
spoken sounds as physical equipment for handling information is the
trouble of storing them. The technique for doing so was mastered only
about 1877 when Thomas A. Edison made the first phonograph. Even with
this advance, no one can glance at a soundtrack and tell quickly what
sounds are stored there; only by turning back the machine and listening
to a groove can we determine this. It was not possible for the men of
2000 B.C. to wait thousands of years for the storing of spoken sounds.
The problem of storing information was accordingly taken to other types
of physical equipment.


PHYSICAL EQUIPMENT FOR HANDLING INFORMATION

        PHYSICAL  ARRANGED   OPERATED OR  LOW   LITTLE PERM-  ERAS- VERS-
    NO. OBJECTS   IN OR ON   PRODUCED BY  COST? SPACE? ANENT? ABLE? ATILE?
    (1)   (2)      (3)          (4)        (5)   (6)    (7)    (8)   (9)

                              _Mind_
     1. Nerve     Human      Body           ✕    ✓✓    ✓     ✓   ✓✓
        cells     brain

                              _Sounds_
     2. Sounds    Air        Voice          ✓✓  ✓✓   ✕✕   ✓✓  ✓✓

     3. Sound-    Wax        Machines       ✓     ✓    ✓✓   ✕   ✓✓
        tracks    cylinders,   and
                  phonograph  motors
                  records

                               _Sights_
     4. Marks     Sand       Stick          ✓     ✕     ✓   ✓✓   ✕

     5. Colored   Cave       Paintbrush     ✕     ✕     ✓   ✕   ✕✕
        painting  walls,     and paints
                               canvases,
                                  etc.

     6. Marks,    Clay,      Stylus,        ✕✕    ✓   ✓✓   ✕✕   ✓
       inscript-  stone      chisel
        ions

     7. Marks     Slate      Chalk          ✓      ✕   ✓    ✓✓    ✓

     8. Marks     Paper,     Pen            ✓✓    ✓   ✓    ✕     ✓✓
                  parchment, and ink,
                   etc.      pencil

     9. Letters,  Paper,     Printing       ✓✓   ✓✓  ✓✓  ✕✕   ✓✓
         etc.     books,       press,
                   etc.      movable
                               type,
                             motor,
                              and hands

    10. Photo-    Film,      Camera         ✓    ✓✓    ✓   ✕✕   ✓✓
         graphs   prints,
                   etc.

    11. Letters,  Paper,     Typewriter     ✓    ✓✓    ✓    ✕    ✓✓
          etc.    mimeograph    and
                  stencil,    fingers
                    etc.
                                _Body_
    12. Gestures  Space      Body           ✓    ✕     ✕✕   ✓✓  ✕✕

    13. Fingers   Hands      Body           ✕    ✕     ✕✕   ✓✓  ✕✕

                               _Objects_
    14. Pebbles   Slab       Hands          ✓✓   ✓     ✓     ✓   ✕✕

    15. Knots     String     Hands          ✓✓   ✓     ✓     ✓   ✕✕

    16. Tallies,  Stick      Knife          ✓✓   ✓    ✓✓   ✕✕  ✕✕
        notches

    17. Beads     Rods in    Hands          ✓     ✓     ✓    ✓✓  ✕✕
                  a frame,
                  abacus

    18. Ruled     Rulers,    Hands,         ✓     ✓     ✓    ✓    ✓
        lines,    scales,    pressure,
        pointers  dials       etc.

                              _Machines_
    19. Counter   Desk       Motor          ✓     ✓     ✓   ✓✓   ✓
         wheels, calculating  and
         gears,   machines,   hands
         keys,  fire-control
        lights, instruments,
          etc.      etc.

    20. Punched   Punch card Motor          ✓✓   ✓✓   ✓    ✕   ✓✓
         cards    machinery, and
          and     teletype,  input
         paper      etc.    instructions
          tape

    21. Relays    Dial       Motor          ✕     ✓    ✓    ✓✓  ✓✓
                  telephone, and
                  other      input
                  machinery instructions

    22. Elect-    Machinery   Motor         ✓    ✓     ✓   ✓✓   ✓✓
          ronic               and
          tubes              input
                             instructions

    23. Magnetic  Machinery   Motor         ✓✓  ✓✓   ✓✓  ✓✓  ✓✓
       surfaces:              and
          wire,              input
          tape,              instructions
          discs

    24. Delay     Machinery   Motor         ✕    ✓     ✕   ✓✓  ✓✓
          lines:              and
       electric,             input
       acoustic              instructions

    25. Electro-  Machinery   Motor         ✕   ✓✓    ✕  ✓✓  ✓✓
          static              and
        storage              input
         tubes               instructions

        ✓✓  yes, very.
        ✓    yes, adequately.
        ✕    not generally.
        ✕✕  not at all.

What are the types of physical equipment for handling information, and
which are the good ones? In the table on pp. 16-17 is a rough list of
25 types of physical equipment for handling information. ✓✓ means “yes,
very;” ✓ means “yes, adequately;” ✕ means “not generally;” ✕✕ means
“not at all.”

For example, our _fingers_ (see No. 13) as a device for handling
information are very expensive for most cases. They take up a good deal
of space. Certainly they are very temporary storage; any information
they may express is very erasable; and what we can express with them
alone is very limited. Yet, with a _typewriter_ (see No. 11), our
fingers become versatile and efficient. In fact, our fingers can make
4 strokes a second; we can select any one of about 38 keys; and, since
each key is equivalent to 5 or 6 units of information, the effective
speed of our fingers may be about 800 units of information a second.


LANGUAGES OF PHYSICAL OBJECTS

The use of pebbles (see No. 14) for keeping track of numerical
information is shown in the history of the words containing the
root _calc_-of the word _calculate_. The Latin word _calcis_ meant
pertaining to lime or limestone, and the Latin word _calculus_ derived
from it meant first a small piece of limestone, and later any small
stone, particularly a pebble used in counting. All three of these
meanings have left descendants: “chalk,” “calcite,” “calcium,” relating
in one way or another to lime; in medicine, “calculus,” referring to
stones in the kidneys or elsewhere in the body; and in mathematics,
“calculate,” “calculus,” referring to computations, once done with
pebbles.

The pebbles, and the slab (for which the ancient Greek word is _abax_)
on which they were arranged and counted, were later replaced, for ease
in handling, by groups of beads strung on rods and placed in a frame
(see No. 17). These constituted the _abacus_ (see Supplement 2 and the
figure there). This was the first calculating machine. It is still
used all over Asia; in fact, even today more people use the abacus for
accounting than use pencil and paper. The skill with which the abacus
can be used was shown in November 1946 in a well-publicized contest
in Japan. Kiyoshi Mastuzaki, a clerk in the Japanese communications
department, using the abacus, challenged Private Thomas Wood of the U.
S. Army, using a modern desk calculating machine, and defeated him in a
speed contest involving additions, subtractions, multiplications, and
divisions.

The heaps of small pebbles, the notches in sticks, and the abacus had
the advantage of being visible and comparatively permanent. Storing
and reading were relatively easy. They were rather compact and easy
to manipulate, certainly much easier than spoken words. But they were
subject to disadvantages also. Moving correctly from one arrangement
to another was difficult, since there was no good way for storing
intermediate steps so that the process could be easily verified.
Furthermore, these devices applied to specified numbers only. Also,
there was no natural provision for recording what the several numbers
belonged to. This had to be recorded with the help of another language,
writing.

The language of physical objects was picked up from obscurity by
the invention of motors and the demands of commerce and business.
Commencing in the late 1800’s, _desk calculating machines_ (see No. 19)
were constructed to meet mass calculation requirements. They would add,
subtract, multiply, and divide specific numbers with great accuracy
and speed. But until recently they still were adjuncts to the other
languages, for they provided figures one at a time for insertion in the
spaces on the ledger pages or calculation sheets where figures were
called for.

Beginning in the 1920’s, a remarkable change has taken place. Instead
of performing single operations, machines have been developed to
perform chains of operations with many kinds of information. One
of these machines is the _dial telephone_: it can select one of 7
million telephones by successive sorting according to the letters
and digits of a telephone number. Another of these machines is a
_fire-control instrument_, a mechanism for controlling the firing
of a gun. For example, in a modern anti-aircraft gun the mechanism
will observe an enemy plane flying at several hundred miles an hour,
convert the observations into gun-aiming directions, and determine the
aiming directions fast enough to shoot down the plane. _Punch-card
machinery_, machines handling information expressed as punched holes
in cards, enable the fulfillment of social security legislation, the
production of the census, and countless operations of banks, insurance
companies, department stores, and factories. And, finally, in 1942 the
first _mechanical brain_ was finished at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.


THE CRUCIAL DEVICES FOR MECHANICAL BRAINS

Let us consider the two modern physical devices for handling
information which make mechanical brains possible. These are _relays_
and _electronic tubes_ (Nos. 21 and 22). The last three kinds of
equipment listed in the table (_magnetic surfaces_, No. 23; _delay
lines_, No. 24; and _electrostatic storage tubes_, No. 25) were not
included in any mechanical brains functioning by the middle of 1948.
The discussion of them is therefore put off to Chapter 10, where we
talk about the future design of mechanical brains.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Relay]

Figure 1 shows a simple relay. There are two electrical circuits
here. One has two terminals—Pickup and Ground. The other has three
terminals—Common, Normally Open, and Normally Closed. When current
flows through the coil of wire around the iron, it makes the iron
a magnet; the magnet pulls down the flap of iron above, overcoming
the force of the spring. When there is no current through the coil,
the iron is not a magnet, and the flap is held up by the spring. Now
suppose that there is current in Common. When there is no current in
Pickup, the current from Common will flow through the upper contact, to
the terminal marked Normally Closed. When there is current in Pickup,
the current from Common will flow through the lower contact, to the
terminal marked Normally Open. Thus we see that a relay expresses a
“yes” or a “no,” a 1 or 0, a binary digit, a unit of information. A
relay costs $5 to $10. It is rather expensive for storing a single unit
of information. The fastest it can be changed from 1 to 0, or vice
versa, is about ¹/₁₀₀ of a second.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Electronic tube.]

Figure 2 shows a simple electronic tube. It has three parts—the
Cathode, the Grid, and the Plate. The Grid actually is a coarse net
of metal wires. Electrons can flow from the Cathode to the Plate,
provided the voltage on the Grid is such as to permit them to flow.
So we can see that an electronic tube is a very simple on-off device
and expresses a “yes” or a “no,” a 1 or 0, a binary digit, a unit of
information. A simple electronic tube suitable for calculating purposes
costs 50 cents to a $1, only ⅒ the cost of a relay. It can be changed
from 1 to 0, or back again, in 1 millionth of a second.

Relays have been widely used in the mechanical brains so far built, and
electronic tubes are the essence of Eniac.

In the next chapter, we shall see how physical equipment for handling
information can be put together to make a simple mechanical brain.




Chapter 3

A MACHINE THAT WILL THINK:

THE DESIGN OF A VERY SIMPLE MECHANICAL BRAIN


We shall now consider how we can design a very simple machine that will
think. Let us call it Simon, because of its predecessor, Simple Simon.


SIMON, THE VERY SIMPLE MECHANICAL BRAIN

By designing Simon, we shall see how we can put together physical
equipment for handling information in such a way as to get a very
simple mechanical brain. At every point in the design of Simon, we
shall make the simplest possible choice that will still give us a
machine that: handles information, transfers information automatically
from one part of the machine to another, and has control over the
sequence of operations. Simon is so simple and so small, in fact, that
it could be built to fill up less space than a grocery-store box, about
4 cubic feet. If we know a little about electrical work, we will find
it rather easy to make Simon.

What do we do first to design the very simple mechanical brain, Simon?


SIMON’S FLESH AND NERVES—REPRESENTING INFORMATION

The first thing we have to decide about Simon is how information will
be represented: as we put it into Simon, as it is moved around inside
of Simon, and as it comes out of Simon. We need to decide what physical
equipment we shall use to make Simon’s flesh and nerves. Since we are
taking the simplest convenient solution to each problem, let us decide
to use: _punched paper tape_ for putting information in, _relays_ (see
Chapter 2) and wires for storing and transferring information, and
_lights_ for putting information out.

[Illustration: TWO-HOLED TAPE READER: Simon’s left ear that listens to
numbers and operations.

FOUR-HOLED TAPE READER: Simon’s right ear that listens to instructions.

LIGHT BULBS: Simon’s eyes that wink answers.

FIG. 1. Simon, the very simple mechanical brain.]

For the equipment inside Simon, we could choose either electronic tubes
or relays. We choose relays, although they are slower, because it is
easier to explain circuits using relays. We can look at a relay circuit
laid out on paper and tell how it works, just by seeing whether or not
current will flow. Examples will be given below. When we look at a
circuit using electronic tubes laid out on paper, we still need to know
a good deal in order to calculate just how it will work.

How will Simon perceive a number or other information by means of
punched tape, or relays, or lights? With punched paper tape having, for
example, 2 spaces where holes may be, Simon can be told 4 numbers—00,
01, 10, 11. Here the binary digit 1 means a hole punched; the binary
digit 0 means no hole punched. With 2 relays together in a register,
Simon can remember any one of the 4 numbers 00, 01, 10, and 11. Here
the binary digit 1 means the relay picked up or energized or closed; 0
means the relay not picked up or not energized or open. With 2 lights,
Simon can give as an answer any one of the 4 numbers 00, 01, 10, 11. In
this case the binary digit 1 means the light glowing; 0 means the light
off. (See Fig. 1.)

We can say that the two lights by which Simon puts out the answer
are his _eyes_ and say that he tells his answer by _winking_. We can
say also that the two mechanisms for reading punched paper tape are
Simon’s _ears_. One tape, called the _input tape_, takes in numbers
or operations. The other tape takes in instructions and is called the
_program tape_.


SIMON’S MENTALITY—POSSIBLE RANGE OF INFORMATION

We can say that Simon has a _mentality_ of 4. We mean not age 4 but
just the simple fact that Simon knows only 4 numbers and can do only 4
operations with them. But Simon can keep on doing these operations in
all sorts of routines as long as Simon has instructions. We decide that
Simon will know just 4 numbers, 0, 1, 2, 3, in order to keep our model
mechanical brain very simple. Then, for any register, we need only 2
relays; for any answer, we need only 2 lights.

Any calculating machine has a _mentality_, consisting of the whole
collection of different ideas that the machine can ever actually
express in one way or another. For example, a 10-place desk calculating
machine can handle numbers up to 10 decimal digits without additional
capacity. It cannot handle bigger numbers.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Four directions.]

What are the 4 _operations with numbers_ which Simon can carry out?
Let us consider some simple operations that we can perform with just 4
numbers. Suppose that they stood for 4 directions in the order east,
north, west, south (see Fig. 2). Or suppose that they stood for a turn
counterclockwise through some right angles as follows:

    0: Turn through   0°, or no right angles.
    1: Turn through  90°, or  1 right angle.
    2: Turn through 180°, or  2 right angles.
    3: Turn through 270°, or  3 right angles.

Then we could have the operations of _addition_ and _negation_, defined
as follows:

        ADDITION           NEGATION
    _c_ = _a_ + _b_       _c_ = -_a_

     _b_: 0 1 2 3          _a_|_c_
    _a_ +—————————        ————+————
     0  | 0 1 2 3           0 | 0
     1  | 1 2 3 0           1 | 3
     2  | 2 3 0 1           2 | 2
     3  | 3 0 1 2           3 | 1

For example, the first table says, “1 plus 3 equals 0.” This means
that, if we turn 1 right angle and then turn in the same direction 3
more right angles, we face in exactly the same way as we did at the
start. This statement is clearly true. For another example, the second
table says, “2 is the negative of 2.” This means that, if we turn to
the left 2 right angles, we face in exactly the same way as if we turn
to the right 2 right angles, and this statement also is, of course,
true.

With only these two operations in Simon, we should probably find him a
little too dull to tell us much. Let us, therefore, put into Simon two
more operations. Let us choose two operations involving both numbers
and logic: in particular, (1) finding which of two numbers is greater
and (2) selecting. In this way we shall make Simon a little cleverer.

It is easy to teach Simon how to find which of two numbers is the
greater when all the numbers that Simon has to know are 0, 1, 2, 3. We
put all possible cases of two numbers _a_ and _b_ into a table:

     _b_: 0 1 2 3
    _a_+—————————
     0 |
     1 |
     2 |
     3 |

Then we tell Simon that we shall mark with 1 the cases where _a_ is
greater than _b_ and mark with 0 the cases where _a_ is not greater
than _b_:

    GREATER THAN

     _b_: 0 1 2 3
    _a_+—————————
     0 |  0 0 0 0
     1 |  1 0 0 0
     2 |  1 1 0 0
     3 |  1 1 1 0
For example, “2 is greater than 3” is false, so we put 0 in the table
on the 2 line in the 3 column. We see that, for the 16 possible cases,
_a_ is greater than _b_ in 6 cases and _a_ is not greater than _b_ in
10 cases.

There is a neat way of saying what we have just said, using the
language of _mathematical logic_ (see Chapter 9 and Supplement 2).
Suppose that we consider the statement “_a_ is greater than _b_” where
_a_ and _b_ may be any of the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3. We can say that the
_truth value p_ of a _statement P_ is 1 if the statement is true and
that it is 0 if the statement is false:

    _p_ = 1 if _P_ is true, 0 if _P_ is false

The truth value of a statement _P_ is conveniently denoted as _T_(_P_)
(see Supplement 2):

    _p_ = _T_(_P_)

Now we can say that the table for the operation _greater than_ shows
the truth value of the statement “_a_ is greater than _b_”:

    _p_ = _T_(_a_ > _b_)

Let us turn now to the operation _selection_. By _selecting_ we mean
choosing one number _a_ if some statement _P_ is true and choosing
another number _b_ if that statement is not true. As before, let _p_
be the truth value of that statement _P_, and let it be equal to 1 if
_P_ is true and to 0 if _P_ is false. Then the operation of selection
is fully expressed in the following table and logical formula (see
Supplement 2):

    SELECTION _c_ = _a_·_p_ + _b_·(1 - _p_)

     _p_: 0 0 0 0  1 1 1 1
     _b_: 0 1 2 3  0 1 2 3
    _a_+——————————————————
     0 |  0 1 2 3  0 0 0 0
     1 |  0 1 2 3  1 1 1 1
     2 |  0 1 2 3  2 2 2 2
     3 |  0 1 2 3  3 3 3 3

For example, suppose that _a_ is 2 and _b_ is 3 and the statement _P_
is the statement “2 is greater than 0.” Since this statement is true,
_p_ is 1, and

    _a_·_p_ + _b_·(1 - _p_) = 2(1) + 3(0) = 2
This result is the same as selecting 2 if 2 is greater than 0 and
selecting 3 if 2 is not greater than 0.

Thus we have four operations for Simon that do not overstrain his
mentality; that is, they do not require him to go to any numbers other
than 0, 1, 2, and 3. These four operations are: addition, negation,
greater than, selection. We label these operations also with the
numbers 00 to 11 as follows: addition, 00; negation, 01; greater than,
10; selection, 11.


SIMON’S MEMORY—STORING INFORMATION

The _memory_ of a mechanical brain consists of physical equipment
in which information can be stored. Usually, each section of the
physical equipment which can store one piece of information is called
a _register._ Each register in Simon will consist of 2 relays. Each
register will hold any of 00, 01, 10, 11. The information stored in
a register 00, 01, 10, 11 may express a number or may express an
operation.

[Illustration: S1-2 Relay energized]

[Illustration: S1-1 Relay not energized

FIG. 3. Register _S_1 storing 10.]

How many registers will we need to put into Simon to store information?
We shall need one register to read the input tape and to store the
number or operation recorded on it. We shall call this register the
_input register I_. We shall need another register to store the number
or operation that Simon says is the answer and to give it to the output
lights. We shall call this register the _output register O_. We shall
need 5 registers for the part of Simon which does the computing, which
we shall call the _computer_: we shall need 3 to store numbers put into
the computer (_C_1, _C_2, _C_3), 1 to store the operation governing the
computer (_C_4), and 1 to store the result (_C_5). Suppose that we
decide to have 8 registers for storing information, so as to provide
some flexibility for doing problems. We shall call these registers
_storage registers_ and name them _S_1, _S_2, _S_3, ··· _S_8. Then
Simon will have 15 registers: a memory that at one time can hold 15
pieces of information.

How will one of these registers hold information? For example, how
will register _S_1 hold the number 2 (see Fig. 3)? The number 2 in
machine language is 10. Register _S_1 consists of two relays, _S_1-2
and _S_1-1. 10 stored in register _S_1 means that relay _S_1-2 will be
energized and that relay _S_1-1 will not be energized.


THE CONTROL OF SIMON

So far we have said nothing about the control of Simon. Is he docile?
Is he stubborn? We know what his capacity is, but we do not know how to
tell him to do anything. How do we connect our desires to his behavior?
How do we tell him a problem? How do we get him to solve it and tell
us the answer? How do we arrange control over the sequence of his
operations? For example, how do we get Simon to add 1 and 2 and tell us
the answer 3?

On the outside of Simon, we have said, there are two ears: little
mechanisms for reading punched paper tape. Also there are two eyes
that can wink: light bulbs that by shining or not shining can put out
information (see Fig. 1). One of the ears—let us call it the _left
ear_—takes in information about a particular problem: numbers and
operations. Here the _problem tape_ or _input tape_ is listened to.
Each line on the input tape contains space for 2 punched holes. So, the
information on the input tape may be 00, 01, 10, or 11—either a number
or an operation. The other ear—let us call it the _right ear_—takes in
information about the sequence of operations, the program or routine
to be followed. Here the _program tape_ or _routine tape_ or _control
tape_ is listened to. Each line on the program tape contains space for
4 punched holes. We tell Simon by _instructions_ on the program tape
what he is to do with the information that we give him on the input
tape. The information on the program tape, therefore, may be 0000,
0001, 0010, ···, 1111, or any number from 0 to 15 expressed in binary
notation (see Supplement 2).

How is this accomplished? In the first place, Simon is a machine, and
he behaves during time. He does different things from time to time.
His behavior is organized in _cycles_. He repeats a cycle of behavior
every second or so. In each cycle of Simon, he listens to or reads the
input tape once and he listens to or reads the program tape twice.
Every complete instruction that goes on the program tape tells Simon a
register from which information is to be sent and a register in which
information is to be received. The first time that he reads the program
tape he gets the name of the register that is to receive certain
information, the _receiving register_. The second time he reads the
program tape he gets the name of the register from which information is
to be sent, the _sending register_. He finishes each cycle of behavior
by transferring information from the sending register to the receiving
register.

For example, suppose that we want to get an answer out of Simon’s
computer into Simon’s output lights. We put down the instruction

    Send information from _C_5 into _O_

or, more briefly,

    _C_5 → _O_

But he does not understand this language. We must translate into
machine language, in this case punched holes in the program tape.
Naturally, the punched holes in the program tape must be able to
specify any sending register and any receiving register. There are 15
registers, and so we give them punched hole _codes_ as follows:

    REGISTER     CODE             REGISTER      CODE
      _I_        0001               _C_1        1010
      _S_1       0010               _C_2        1011
      _S_2       0011               _C_3        1100
      _S_3       0100               _C_4        1101
      _S_4       0101               _C_5        1110
      _S_5       0110               _O_         1111
      _S_6       0111
      _S_7       1000
      _S_8       1001

To translate the direction of transfer of information, which we showed
as an arrow, we put on the program tape the code for the receiving
register first—in this case, output, _O_, 1111—and the code for the
sending register second—in this case, _C_5, 1110. The instruction
becomes 1111, 1110. The first time in any cycle that Simon listens with
his right ear, he knows that what he hears is the name of the receiving
register; and the second time that he listens, he knows that what he
hears is the name of the sending register. One reason for this sequence
is that any person or machine has to be prepared beforehand to absorb
or take in any information.

Now how do we tell Simon to add 1 and 2? On the input tape, we put:

    Add   00
     1    01
     2    10

On the program tape, we need to put:

      _I_  →  _C_4
      _I_  →  _C_1
      _I_  →  _C_2
    _C_5   →  _O_

which becomes:

    1101, 0001;
    1010, 0001;
    1011, 0001;
    1111, 1110


THE USEFULNESS OF SIMON

Thus we can see that Simon can do such a problem as:

    Add 0 and 3. Add 2 and the negative of 1.
    Find which result is greater.
    Select 3 if this result equals 2; otherwise select 2.

To work out the coding for this and like problems would be a good
exercise. Simon, in fact, is a rather clever little mechanical brain,
even if he has only a mentality of 4.

It may seem that a simple model of a mechanical brain like Simon
is of no great practical use. On the contrary, Simon has the same
use in instruction as a set of simple chemical experiments has: to
stimulate thinking and understanding and to produce training and skill.
A training course on mechanical brains could very well include the
construction of a simple model mechanical brain as an exercise. In this
book, the properties of Simon may be a good introduction to the various
types of more complicated mechanical brains described in later chapters.

The rest of this chapter is devoted to such questions as:

    How do transfers of information actually take place
      in Simon?

    How does the computer in Simon work so that calculation
      actually occurs?

    How could Simon actually be constructed?

What follows should be skipped unless you are interested in these
questions and the burdensome details needed for answering them.


SIMON’S THINKING—TRANSFERRING INFORMATION

The first basic thinking operation for any mechanical brain is
transferring information automatically. Let us see how this is done in
Simon.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Scheme of Simon.]

Let us first take a look at the scheme of Simon as a mechanical brain
(see Fig. 4). We have 1 input, 8 storage, 5 computer, and 1 output
registers, which are connected by means of transfer wires or a transfer
line along which numbers or operations can travel as electrical
impulses. This transfer line is often called the _bus_, perhaps because
it is always busy carrying something. In Simon the bus will consist of
2 wires, one for carrying the right-hand digit and one for carrying the
left-hand digit of any number 00, 01, 10, 11. Simon also has a number
of neat little devices that will do the following:

    When any number goes into a register, the coils of the
      relays of the register will be connected with the bus.

    When any number goes out of a register, the contacts of
      the relays of the register will be connected with the bus.

For example, suppose that in register _C_5 the number 2 is stored. In
machine language this is 10. That means the left-hand relay (_C_5-2) is
energized and the right-hand relay (_C_5-1) is not energized. Suppose
that we want to transfer this number 2 into the output register _O_,
which has been cleared. What do we do?

Let us take a look at a circuit that will transfer the number (see
Fig. 5). First we see two relays in this circuit. They belong to the
_C_5 register. The _C_5-2 relay is energized since it holds 1; current
is flowing through its coil, the iron core becomes a magnet, and the
contact above it is pulled down. The _C_5-1 relay is not energized
since it holds 0; its contact is not pulled down. The next thing we
see is two _rectifiers_. The sign for these is a triangle. These are
some modern electrical equipment that allow electrical current to
flow in only one direction. In the diagram, the direction is shown by
the pointing of the triangle along the wire. Rectifiers are needed to
prevent undesired circuits. Next, we see the bus, consisting of two
wires. One carries the impulses for left-hand or 2 relays, and the
other carries impulses for the right-hand or 1 relays. Next, we see
two relays, called the _entrance relays_ for the _O_ register. Current
from Source 1 may flow to these relays, energize them, and close their
contacts. When the first line of the program tape is read, specifying
the receiving register, the code 1111 causes Source 1 to be energized.
This fact is shown schematically by the arrow running from the program
tape code 1111 to Source 1. Finally, we see the coils of the two
relays for the Output or _O_ register. We thus see that we have a
circuit from the contacts of the _C_5 register through the bus to the
coils of the _O_ register.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Transfer circuit.]

We are now ready to transfer information when the second line of the
program tape is read. This line holds 1110 and designates _C_5 as the
sending register and causes Source 2 to be energized. This fact is
shown schematically by the arrow running from the second line of the
program tape to Source 2. When the second line is read, current flows:

    1. From Source 2.

    2. Through the contacts of the _C_5 register if closed.

    3. Through the rectifiers.

    4. Through the bus.

    5. Through the entrance relay contacts of the _O_ register.

    6. Through the coils of the _O_ register relays, energizing
       such of them as match with the _C_5 closed contacts; and
       finally

    7. Into the ground.

Thus relay _O_-2 is energized; it receives current because contact
_C_5-2 is closed. And relay _O_-1 is not energized; it receives no
current since contact _C_5-1 is open. So we have actually transferred
information from the _C_5 register to the _O_ register.

The same process in principle applies to all transfers:

    The pattern of electrical impulses, formed by the positioning
    of one register, is produced in the positioning of another
    register.


SIMON’S COMPUTING AND REASONING

Now so far the computing registers in Simon are a mystery. We have said
that _C_1, _C_2, and _C_3 take in numbers 00, 01, 10, 11, that _C_4
takes in an operation 00, 01, 10, 11, and that _C_5 holds the result.
What process does Simon use so that he has the correct result in
register _C_5?

Let us take the simplest computing operation first and see what sort of
a circuit using relays will give us the result. The simplest computing
operation is _negation_. In negation, a number 00, 01, 10, 11 goes into
the _C_1 register, and the operation 01 meaning negation goes into the
_C_4 register, and the correct result must be in the _C_5 register. So,
first, we note the fact that the _C_4-2 relay must not be energized,
since it contains 0, and that the _C_4-1 relay must be energized, since
it contains 1.

Now the table for negation, with _c_ =-_a_, is:

    _a_ | _c_
    ————+————
     0  |  0
     1  |  3
     2  |  2
     3  |  1

Negation in machine language will be:

    _a_ | _c_
    ————+————
     00 | 00
     01 | 11
     10 | 10
     11 | 01

Now if _a_ is in the _C_1 register and if _c_ is in the _C_5 register,
then negation will be:

    _C_1 | _C_5
    —————+—————
     00  |  00
     01  |  11
     10  |  10
     11  |  01

But each of these registers _C_1, _C_5 will be made up of two relays,
the left-hand or 2 relay and the right-hand or 1 relay. So, in terms of
these relays, negation will be:

    _C_1-2 _C_1-1 | _C_5-2 _C_5-1
    ——————————————+——————————————
      0      0    |   0      0
      0      1    |   1      1
      1      0    |   1      0
      1      1    |   0      1

Now, on examining the table, we see that the _C_5-1 relay is energized
if and only if the _C_1-1 relay is energized. So, in order to energize
the _C_5-1 relay, all we have to do is transfer the information from
_C_1-1 to _C_5-1. This we can do by the circuit shown in Fig. 6. (In
this and later diagrams, we have taken one more step in streamlining
the drawing of relay contacts: the contacts are drawn, but the coils
that energize them are represented only by their names.)

[Illustration: FIG. 6. Negation—right-hand digit.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Negation—left-hand digit.]

Taking another look at the table, we see also that the _C_5-2 relay
must be energized if and only if:

    _C_1-2     AND     _C_1-1
     HOLDS:             HOLDS:
       0                  1
       1                  0

A circuit that will do this is the one shown in Fig. 7. In Fig. 8 is a
circuit that will do all the desired things together: give the right
information to the _C_5 relay coils if and only if the _C_4 relays hold
01.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Negation circuit.]

Let us check this circuit. First, if there is any operation other than
01 stored in the _C_4 relays, then no current will be able to get
through the _C_4 contacts shown and into the _C_5 relay coils, and the
result is blank. Second, if we have the operation 01 stored in the _C_4
relays, then the _C_4-2 contacts will not be energized—a condition
which passes current—and the _C_4-1 contacts will be energized—another
condition which passes current—and:

    IF THE NUMBER                                  AND THE _C_5 RELAYS
     IN _C_1 IS:    THEN _C_1-1:    AND _C_1-2:      ENERGIZED ARE:
          0        does not close  does not close     neither
          1        closes          does not close    _C_5-2, _C_5-1
          2        does not close  closes            _C_5-2 only
          3        closes          closes            _C_5-1 only

Thus we have shown that this circuit is correct.

We see that this circuit uses more than one set of contacts for several
relays (_C_1-2, _C_4-1, _C_4-2); relays are regularly made with 4, 6,
or 12 sets of contacts arranged side by side, all controlled by the
same pickup coil. These are called 4-, 6-, or 12-_pole_ relays.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Addition circuit.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10. Greater-than circuit.]

Circuits for _addition_, _greater than_, and _selection_ can also be
determined rather easily (see Figs. 9, 10, 11). (_Note_: By means of
the _algebra of logic_, referred to in Chapter 9 and Supplement 2, the
conditions for many relay circuits, as well as the circuit itself, may
be expressed algebraically, and the two expressions may be checked by
a mathematical process.) For example, let us check that the addition
circuit in Fig. 9 will enable us to add 1 and 2 and obtain 3. We take
a colored pencil and draw closed the contacts for _C_1-1 (since _C_1
holds 01) and for _C_2-2 (since _C_2 holds 10). Then, when we trace
through the circuit, remembering that addition is stored as 00 in the
_C_4 relays, we find that both the _C_5 relays are energized. Hence
_C_5 holds 11, which is 3. Thus Simon can add 1 and 2 and make 3!

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Selection Circuit.]


PUTTING SIMON TOGETHER

In order to put Simon together and make him work, not very much is
needed. On the outside of Simon we shall need two small mechanisms for
reading punched paper tape. Inside Simon, there will be about 50 relays
and perhaps 100 feet of wire for connecting them. In addition to the 15
registers (_I_, _S_1 to _S_8, _C_1 to _C_5, and _O_), we shall need a
register of 4 relays, which we shall call the _program register_. This
register will store the successive instructions read off the program
tape. We can call the 4 relays of this register _P_8, _P_4, _P_2, _P_1.
For example, if the _P_8 and _P_2 relays are energized, the register
holds 1010, and this is the program instruction that calls for the 8th
plus 2nd, or 10th, register, which is _C_1.

For connecting receiving registers to the bus, we shall need a relay
with 2 poles, one for the 2-line and one for the 1-line, for each
register that can receive a number from the bus. For example, for
entering the output register, we actually need only one 2-pole relay
instead of the two 1-pole relays drawn for simplicity in Fig. 5. There
will be 13 2-pole relays for this purpose, since only 13 registers
receive numbers from the bus; registers _I_ and _C_5 do not receive
numbers from the bus. We call these 13 relays the _entrance relays_ or
_E relays_, since _E_ is the initial letter of the word entrance.

[Illustration: FIG. 12. Select-Receiving-Register circuit.]

The circuit for selecting and energizing the _E_ relays is shown in
Fig. 12. We call this circuit the _Select-Receiving-Register_ circuit.
For example, suppose that the _P_8 and _P_2 relays are energized. Then
this circuit energizes the _E_10 relay. The _E_10 relay closes the
contacts between the _C_1 relay coils and the bus; and so it connects
the _C_1 register to receive the next number that is sent into the bus.
This kind of circuit expresses a classification and is sometimes called
a _pyramid circuit_ since it spreads out like a pyramid. A similar
pyramid circuit is used to select the sending register.

We shall need a relay for moving the input tape a step at a time. We
shall call this relay the _MI relay_, for _m_oving _i_nput tape. We
also need a relay for moving the program tape a step at a time. We
shall call this relay the _MP relay_ for _m_oving _p_rogram tape. Here
then is approximately the total number of relays required:

          RELAYS                        NAME                NUMBER
    _I_, _S_, _C_, _O_    Input, Storage, Computer, Output    30
    _P_                   Program                              4
    _E_                   Entrance                            13
    _MI_                  Move Input Tape                      1
    _MP_                  Move Program Tape                    1
                                                             ————
                              Total                           49

A few more relays may be needed to provide more contacts or poles. For
example, a single _P_1 relay will probably not have enough poles to
meet all the need for its contacts.

[Illustration: FIG. 13. Latch relay.]

Each cycle of the machine will be divided into 5 equal _time intervals_
or _times_ 1 to 5. The timing of the machine will be about as follows:

    TIME                                ACTION
     1  Move program tape. Move input tape if read out of in last
        cycle.
     2  Read program tape, determining the receiving register.
        Read through the computing circuit setting up the
        _C_5 register.
     3  Move program tape. Energize the _E_ relay belonging
        to the receiving register.
     4  Read program tape again, determining the sending register.
     5  Transfer information by reading through the
        Select-Sending-Register circuit and the
        Select-Receiving-Register circuit.

In order that information may remain in storage until wanted, register
relays should hold their information until just before the next
information is received. This can be accomplished by keeping current in
their coils or in other ways. There is a type of relay called a _latch
relay_, which is made with two coils and a latch. This type of relay
has the property of staying or latching in either position until the
opposite coil is impulsed (see Fig. 13). This type of relay would be
especially good for the registers of Simon.

If any reader sets to work to construct Simon, and if questions arise,
the author will be glad to try to answer them.




Chapter 4

COUNTING HOLES:

PUNCH-CARD CALCULATING MACHINES


When we think of counting, we usually think of saying softly to
ourselves “one, two, three, four, ···.” This is a good way to find the
total of a small group of objects. But when we have a large group of
objects or a great many groups of objects to be counted, a much faster
way of counting is needed. A very fast way of sorting and counting is
_punch-card calculating machinery_. This is machinery which handles
information expressed as holes in cards. _Punch-card machines_ can:

    Sort, count, file, select, and copy information,
    Make comparisons, and choose according to instructions,
    Add, subtract, multiply, and divide,
    List information, and print totals.

For example, in a life insurance company, much routine handling of
information about insurance policies is necessary:

    Writing information on newly issued policies.

    Setting up policy-history cards.

    Making out notices of premiums due.

    Making registers of policies in force, lapsed, died, etc.,
      for purposes of valuation as required by law or good
      management.

    Calculating and tabulating premium rates, dividend rates,
      reserve factors, etc.

    Computing and tabulating expected and actual death rates;
      and much more.

All these operations can be done almost automatically by punch-card
machines.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT

When a census of the people of a country is taken, a great quantity of
sorting and counting is needed: by village, county, city, and state;
by sex; by age; by occupation; etc. In 1886, the census of the people
of the United States which had been taken in 1880 was still being
sorted and counted. Among the men then studying census problems was
a statistician and inventor, Herman Hollerith. He saw that existing
methods were so slow that the next census (1890) would not be finished
before the following census (1900) would have to be begun. He knew
that cards with patterns of holes had been used in weaving patterns
in cloth. He realized that the presence or absence of a property, for
example employed or unemployed, could be represented by the presence
or absence of a hole in a piece of paper. An electrical device could
detect the hole, he believed, since it would allow current to flow
through, whereas the absence of the hole would stop the current. He
experimented with sorting and counting, using punched holes in cards,
and with electrical devices to detect the holes and count them. A
definite meaning was given to each place in the card where a hole might
be punched. Then electrical devices handled the particular information
that the punches represented. These devices either counted or added,
singly or in various combinations, as might be desired.

More than 50 years of development of punch-card calculating machinery
have since then taken place. Several large companies have made
quantities of punch-card machines. A great degree of development has
taken place in the punch-card machines of International Business
Machines Corporation (IBM), and for this reason these machines will
be the ones described in this chapter. What is said here, however,
may also in many ways apply to punch-card machines made by other
manufacturers—Remington-Rand, Powers, Control Instrument, etc.


GENERAL PRINCIPLES

To use punch-card machines, we first convert the original information
into patterns of holes in cards. Then we feed the cards into the
machines. Electrical impulses read the pattern of holes and convert
them into a pattern of timed electrical currents. Actually, the
reading of a hole in a column of a punch card is done by a brush of
several strands of copper wire pressed against a metal roller (Fig.
1). The machine feeds the card (the bottom edge first, where the 9’s
are printed) with very careful timing over the roller; and, when the
punched hole is between the brush and the roller, an electrical circuit
belonging to that column of the card is completed. The machine responds
according to its general design and its wiring for the particular
problem: it punches new cards, or it prints new marks, or it puts
information into new storage places. Clerks, however, move the cards
from one machine to another. They wait on the machines, keep the card
feeds full, and empty the card hoppers as they fill up. A human error
of putting the wrong block of cards into a machine may from time to
time cause a little trouble, especially in sorting. Actually, in a
year, billions of punch cards are handled precisely.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Reading of punch cards.]

The _punch card_ is a masterpiece of engineering and standardization.
Its exact thickness matches the knife-blade edges that feed the cards
into slots in the machines, and matches the channels whereby these
cards travel through the machines. The standard card is 7⅜ inches long
and 3¼ inches wide, and it has a standard thickness of 0.0065 inch and
other standard properties with respect to stiffness, finish, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Scheme of standard punch card. (Note: Positions
11 and 12 are not usually marked by printed numbers or letters.)]

The standard IBM punch card of today has 80 _columns_ and 12
_positions_ for punching in each column (Fig. 2). A single punched
hole in each of the positions known as 0 to 9 stands for each of the
digits 0 to 9 respectively. The remaining 2 single punch positions
available in any column are usually called the _11 position_ and _12
position_ (though sometimes called the numerical _X position_ and _Y
position_). These two positions do not behave arithmetically as 11 and
12. Actually, in the space between one card and the next card as they
are fed through the machines, more positions occur. For example, there
may be 4 more: a 10 position preceding the 9, and a 13, a 14, and a
15 position following the 12. The 16 positions in total correspond to
a full turn, 360°, of the roller under the brush, and to a complete
_cycle_ in the machine; and a single position corresponds to ¹/₁₆ of
360°, or 22½°. In some machines, the total number of positions may be
20. A pair of punches stands for each of the letters of the alphabet,
according to the scheme shown.

    A    12-1        J    11-1     Unused  0-1
    B    12-2        K    11-2        S    0-2
    C    12-3        L    11-3        T    0-3
    D    12-4        M    11-4        U    0-4
    E    12-5        N    11-5        V    0-5
    F    12-6        O    11-6        W    0-6
    G    12-7        P    11-7        X    0-7
    H    12-8        Q    11-8        Y    0-8
    I    12-9        R    11-9        Z    0-9

For example, the word MASON is shown punched in Fig. 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Alphabetic punching.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Single-panel plugboard.]

To increase the versatility of the machines and provide them with
instructions, many of them have _plugboards_ (Fig. 4). These are
standard interchangeable boards filled with prongs on one side and
holes or terminals called _hubs_ on the other side. The side with the
prongs connects to the ends of electrical circuits in the punch-card
machine, which are brought together in one place for the purpose.
On the other side of the board, using plugwires, we can connect the
hubs to each other in different ways to produce different results.
The single-panel plugboard is 10 inches long and 5¾ inches wide. It
contains 660 hubs in front and 660 corresponding prongs in the back.
A double-panel plugboard or a triple-panel plugboard applies to some
machines. In less time than it takes to describe it, we can take one
wired-up plugboard out of a machine and put in a new wired-up plugboard
and thus change completely the instructions under which the machine
operates. Many of the machines have a number of different switches that
we must also change, when going from one kind of problem to another.

The numbers that are stored or sorted in punch-card machines may be
of any size up to 80 digits, one in each column of the punch card. In
doing arithmetic (adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing),
however, the largest number of digits is usually 10. Beyond 10 digits,
we can work out tricks in many cases.


TYPES OF PUNCH-CARD MACHINES

The chief IBM punch-card machines are: the _key punch_, the _verifier_,
the _sorter_, the _interpreter_, the _reproducer_, the _collator_, the
_multiplying punch_, the _calculating punch_, and the _tabulator_. Of
these 9 machines, the last 6 have plugboards and can do many different
operations as a result.

There is a flow of punch cards through each of these machines. The
machines differ from each other in the number and relation of the
paths of flow, or _card channels_, and in the number and relation of
the momentary stopping places, or _card stations_, at which cards are
read, punched, or otherwise acted on. We can get a good idea of what a
machine is from a picture of these card channels.


Key Punch

We use a key punch (Fig. 5) to punch original information into
blank cards. In the key punch there is one card channel; it has one
entrance, one station, and one exit. At the card station, there are
12 _punching dies_, one for each position in the card column, and
each card column is presented one by one for punching. The numeric
_keyboard_ (Fig. 6) for the key punch has 14 keys:

    One key for each of the
      punches 0 to 9, 11, and 12,

    A _space key_, which allows a
      column of the punch card to
      go by with no punch in it,

    A _release key_, which ejects the
      card and feeds another card.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Key punch.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. Keyboard of key punch.]

Of course, in using a key punch, we must punch the same kind of
information in the same group of columns. For example, if these cards
are to contain employees’ social security numbers, we must punch that
number always in the same card columns, numbered, say, 15 to 23, or 70
to 78, etc.


Verifier

The verifier is really the same machine as the key punch, but it has
dull punching dies moving gently instead of sharp ones moving with
force. It turns on a red light and stops when there is no punched hole
in the right spot to match with a pressed key.


Sorter

The sorter is a machine for sorting cards, one column at a time (Fig.
7). The sorter has a card channel that forks; it has one entrance,
one station, and 13 exits. Each exit corresponds to: one of the 12
punch positions 0 to 9, 11, and 12; or _reject_, which applies when the
column is nowhere punched. It has one card station where a brush reads
a single column of the card. We can turn a handle and move the brush to
any column.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Sorter.]


Interpreter

The interpreter takes in a card, reads its punches, prints on the card
the marks indicated by the punches, and stacks the card. We call this
process _interpreting_ the card, since it translates the punched holes
into printed marks. The interpreter (Fig. 8) has one card channel, with
one entrance, 2 card stations, and one exit. What the machine does at
the second card station depends on what the machine reads at the first
card station and on what we have told the machine by switches and
plugboard wiring to do.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Interpreter.]


Reproducer

The reproducer or reproducing punch can:

    _Reproduce_, or copy the punches in one group of
        cards into another group of cards (in the same or
        different columns).

    _Compare_, or make sure that the punches in two
         groups of cards agree (and shine a red light if
         they do not).

    _Gang punch_, or copy the punches in a _master card_
         into a group of _detail cards_.

    _Summary punch_, or copy totals or summaries obtained
         in the tabulator into blank cards in the reproducer.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Reproducer.]

The reproducer (Fig. 9) has 2 independent card channels, the cards not
mingling in any way, called the _reading channel_ and the _punching
channel_. We can run the machine with only the punching channel
working; in fact, IBM equips some models only with the punching
channel, particularly for “summary punch” operation. The machine
is timed so that, when any card is at the middle station in either
channel, then the next preceding card is at the latest station, and
the next following card is at the earliest station. At 5 stations, the
machine reads a card. At the middle station of the punching channel,
the machine punches a card. Using a many-wire cable, we can connect
the tabulator to the reproducer and so cause the tabulator to give
information electrically to the reproducer. This connection makes
possible the “summary punch” operation. Here is an instance with
punch-card machines where, in order to transfer information from one
machine to another, we are not required to move cards physically from
one machine to another.


Collator

The collator is a machine that arranges or _collates_ cards. It is
particularly useful in selecting, matching, and merging cards. The
collator (Fig. 10) has 2 card channels which join and then fork into 4
channels ending in pockets called _Hoppers_ 1, 2, 3, and 4. The 2 card
feeds are called the _Primary Feed_ and the _Secondary Feed_. Cards
from the Primary Feed may fall only into the first and second hoppers.
Cards from the Secondary Feed may fall only into the second, third, and
fourth hoppers. The collator has 3 stations at which cards may be read.

[Illustration: No.1--Selected primaries

No.2--Merged cards and unselected primaries

No.3--Separate secondaries not selected

No.4--Selected secondaries

FIG. 10. Collator.]

IBM can supply additional wiring called the _collator counting device_.
With this we can make the collator count cards as well as compare them.
For example, we could put 12 blank cards from the Secondary Feed behind
each punched-card from the Primary Feed in order to prepare for some
other operation.


Calculating Punch

The calculating punch was introduced in 1946. It is a versatile machine
of considerable capacity. It adds, subtracts, multiplies, and divides.
It also has a control over a sequence of operations, in some cases up
to half a dozen steps.

This machine (Fig. 11) has one card channel with 4 stations called,
respectively, _control brushes_, _reading brushes_, _punch feed_, and
_punching dies_. At station 1, there are 20 brushes; we can set these
by hand to read any 20 of the 80 card columns. At station 2 there are
80 regular reading brushes. At station 3 the card waits for a part
of a second while the machine calculates, and, when that is done,
the card is fed into station 4, where it is punched or verified. The
multiplying punch is an earlier model of the calculating punch, without
the capacity for division.

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Calculating punch.]


Tabulator

The tabulator can select and list information from cards. Also, it can
total information from groups of cards in _counters_ of the tabulator
and can print the totals.

[Illustration: FIG. 12. Tabulator.]

The tabulator (Fig. 12) has one card channel with two stations where
cards may be read, called the _Upper Brushes_ and _Lower Brushes_.
When the Lower Brush station is reading one card, the Upper Brush
station is reading the next card. The tabulator also has another
channel, which is for endless paper (and sometimes separate sheets or
cards). This channel has one station; here printing takes place. Unlike
the typewriter, the tabulator prints a whole row at a time. It can
print up to 88 numerals or letters across the sheet in one stroke. The
cards flowing through the card channel and the paper flowing through
the paper channel do not have to move in step; in fact, we need many
different time relations between them, and the number of rows printed
on the paper may have almost any relation to the number of punch cards
flowing through the card channel.

At the station where paper is printed, we can put on the machine a
mechanism called the _automatic carriage_. This is like a typewriter
carriage, which holds the paper for a typewriter, but we can control
the movement of paper through the automatic carriage by plugboard
wiring, switch settings, and holes in punch cards. Thus we can arrange
for headings, spacing, and feeding of new sheets to be controlled by
the information and the instructions, with a great deal of versatility.


HANDLING INFORMATION

We have now described briefly the chief available punch-card machines
as of the middle of 1948. The next question is: How do we actually get
something done by means of punch cards? Let us go back to the census
example, even though it may not be a very typical example, and see what
would be done if we wished to compile a census by punch cards.

The first thing we do is plan which columns of the punch card will
contain what information about the people being counted. For example,
the following might be part of the plan:

                         NO. OF
     INFORMATION      POSSIBILITIES   COLUMNS
    State                    60          1- 2
    County                1,000          3- 5
    Township             10,000          6- 9
    City or village      10,000         10-13
    Sex                       2            14
    Age last birthday       100         15-16
    Occupation          100,000         17-21
    ...                   ...            ...

Under the heading state, we know that there are 48 states, the District
of Columbia, and several territories and possessions—all told, perhaps
60 possibilities. So, 2 punch-card columns are enough: they will allow
100 different sets of punches from 00 to 99 to be put in them. We then
assign the _code_ 00 to Maine, 01 to New Hampshire, 02 to Vermont,
etc., or we might assign the code 00 to Alabama, 01 to Arizona, 02
to Arkansas, etc.—whichever would be more useful. Under the other
headings, we do the same thing: count the possibilities; assign codes.
In this case, it will be reasonable to use numeric codes 0 to 9 in each
column in all places because we shall have millions of cards to deal
with and numeric codes can be sorted faster than alphabetic codes.
Alphabetic codes require 2 punched holes in each column, and sorting
any column takes 2 operations.

The punch cards are printed with the chosen headings. We set up
the codes in charts and give them to clerks. Using key punches and
verifiers, they punch up the cards and check them. They work from the
original information collected by the census-taker in the field. Since
the original information will come in geographically, probably only one
geographic code at a time will be needed, and it will be simple to keep
track of. As to occupation, however, it may be useful to assign other
clerks full-time to examining the original information and specifying
the right code for the occupation. Then the clerks who do the punching
will have only copying to do.

The great bulk of the work with the census will be sorting, counting,
and totaling. The original punch cards will be summarized into larger
and larger groups. For example, the cards for all males age 23 last
birthday living in the state of Massachusetts are sorted together. This
group of cards may be put into a tabulator wired to a summary punch.
When the tabulator has counted the last card of this group, the summary
punch punches one card, showing the total number in this group. Some
time later a card like this will be ready for every state. Then the
whole group of state cards may be fed into the tabulator wired to the
reproducer acting as summary punch. When totaled, the number of males
age 23 last birthday in the United States will be punched into a single
card. After more compiling, a card like this will be ready for all
males in the United States at each age. Then this group of cards may
be fed into the tabulator wired to the summary punch. Each card may
be listed by the tabulator on the paper flowing through it, showing
the age and the number of males living at that age. At the end of the
listing, the tabulator will print the total number of all males in the
list, and the summary punch will punch a card containing this total.


ARITHMETICAL OPERATIONS

Punch-card machines can perform the arithmetical operations of
counting, adding, subtracting, multiplying, dividing, and rounding off.


Counting

Counting can be done by the sorter, the tabulator, and the collator.
The tabulator can print the total count. The tabulator and summary
punch wired together can put the total count automatically into another
punch card. The sorter shows the count in dials.


Adding and Subtracting

Adding and subtracting can be done by the tabulator, the calculating
punch, and the multiplying punch. In the calculating and multiplying
punches, the sum or difference is usually punched into the same card
from which the numbers were first obtained. The tabulator, however,
obtains the result first in a counter; from the counter, it can be
printed on paper or punched into a blank card with the aid of the
summary punch.

Numbers are handled as groups of decimal digits, and the machines
mirror the properties of digits in the decimal system. Negative numbers
are usually handled as _complements_ (see Supplement 2). For example,
if we have in the tabulator a counter with a capacity of six digits,
the number-000013 is stored in the counter as the complement 999987.
We cannot store in the counter the number +999987, since we cannot
distinguish it from-000013. In other words, if a counter is to be used
for both positive and negative numbers, its capacity is actually one
digit less, since in the last decimal place on the left 0 will mean
positive and 9 will mean negative.


Multiplying and Dividing

Multiplying is done in the calculating and multiplying punches. In
both cases, the multiplication table is built into the circuits of
the machine, and the system of _left-hand components_ and _right-hand
components_ is used (see Supplement 2).

Dividing is done in the calculating punch and is carried out in that
machine much as in ordinary arithmetic. By means of an estimating
circuit the calculating punch guesses what multiple of the divisor will
go into the dividend. Then it determines that multiple and tries it.


Rounding Off

Rounding off may be done in 3 punch-card machines, the calculating
and multiplying punches, and the tabulator. For example, suppose we
have the numbers 49.1476, 68.5327, and we wish to round them off to
2 decimal places. The results will be 49.15 and 68.53. For the first
number, we raise the .0076, turning .1476 into .15, since .0076 is more
than .005. For the second number, we drop the .0027 since it is less
than .005.

Each of these punch-card machines provides what is called a _5 impulse_
in each machine cycle. When the number is to be rounded off, the 5
impulse is plugged into the first decimal place that is to be dropped,
and it is there added. If the figure in the decimal place to be dropped
is 0 to 4, the added 5 makes no difference in the last decimal place
that is to be kept. But, if the figure in the decimal place to be
dropped is 5 to 9, then the added 5 makes a carry into the last decimal
place that is to be kept, increasing it by 1, and this is just what is
wanted for rounding off.


LOGICAL OPERATIONS

Punch-card machines do many operations of reasoning or logic that do
not involve addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division. Just
as we can write equations for arithmetical operations, so we can write
equations for these logical operations using mathematical logic (see
Chapter 9 and Supplement 2). If any reader, however, is not interested
in these logical equations, he should skip each paragraph that begins
with “in the language of logic,” or a similar phrase.


Translating

Reading and writing are operations perhaps not strictly of reasoning
but of _translating_ from one language to another. Basically these
operations take in a mark in one language and give out a mark with the
same meaning in another language. For example, the interpreter takes in
punched holes and gives out printed marks, but the holes and the marks
have the same meaning.

The major part of sorting is done by a punch-card sorting machine and
can be considered an operation of translating. In sorting a card, the
machine takes in a mark in the form of a punched hole on a punch card
and specifies a place bearing the same mark where the card is put. The
remaining part of sorting is done by human beings. This part consists
of picking up blocks of cards from the pockets of the sorter and
putting the blocks together in the right sequence.


Comparing

[Illustration: FIG. 13. Comparer.]

The first operation of reasoning done by punch-card machines is
_comparing_. For an example of comparing in the operation of the
tabulator, let us take instructing the machine when to pick up a total
and print it. As an illustration, suppose that we are making a table
by state, county, and township of the number of persons counted in a
census. Suppose that for each township we have one punch card telling
the total number of persons. If all the cards are in sequence, then,
whenever the county changes, we want a minor total, and, whenever the
state changes, we want a major total. What does the machine do?

The tabulator has a mechanism that we shall call a _comparer_ (Fig.
13). A comparer has 2 inputs that may be called _Previous_ and
_Current_ and one output that may be called _Unequal_. The comparer
has the property of giving out an impulse if and only if there is a
difference between the 2 inputs.

In the language of the algebra of logic (see Supplement 2 and Chapter
9), let the pieces of information coming into the comparer be _a_ and
_b_, and let the information coming out of the comparer be _p_. Then
the equation of the comparer is:

    _p_ = _T_(_a_ ≠ _b_)

where “_T_ (···)” is “the truth value of ···” and “···” is a statement,
and where the truth value is 1 if true and 0 if false.

In wiring the tabulator so that it can tell when to total, we use the
comparer. We feed into it the county from the current card and the
county from the previous card. Out of the comparer we get an impulse if
and only if these two pieces of information are different. This is just
what happens when the county changes. The impulse from the comparer is
then used in further wiring of the tabulator: it makes the counter that
is busy totaling the number of persons in the county print its total
and then clear. In the same way, another comparer, which watches state
instead of county, takes care of major totals when the state changes.


Selecting

The next operation of reasoning which punch-card machines can do
is _selecting_. The tabulator, collator, interpreter, reproducer,
and calculating punch all may contain mechanisms that can select
information. These mechanisms are called _selectors_.

For example, suppose that we are using the tabulator to make a table
showing for each city the number of males and the number of females.
In the table we shall have three columns: first, city; second, males;
third, females. Suppose that each punch card in columns 30 to 36 shows
the total of males or females in a city. Suppose that, if and only if
the card is for females, it has an X punch (or 11 punch) in column 79.
What do we want to have happen? We want the number in columns 30 to 36
to go into the second column of the table if there is no X in column
79, and we want it to go into the third column of the table if there is
an X in column 79. This is just another way of saying that we want the
number to go into the males column if it is a number of males, and into
the females column if it is a number of females. We make this happen by
using a selector.

A selector (Fig. 14) is a mechanism with 2 inputs and 2 outputs. The
2 inputs are called _X Pickup_ and _Common_. The 2 outputs are called
_X_ and _No X_. The X Pickup, as its name implies, watches for X’s.
The Common takes in information. What comes out of X is what goes into
Common if and only if an X punch is picked up; otherwise nothing comes
out. What comes out of No X is what goes into Common if and only if an
X punch is not picked up; otherwise nothing comes out. From the point
of view of ordering punch-card equipment, we should note that there are
two types of selectors: _X selectors_ or _X distributors_, which have a
selecting capacity of one column—that is, one decimal digit—and _class
selectors_, which ordinarily have a selecting capacity of 10 columns or
10 decimal digits. But we shall disregard this difference here, as we
have disregarded most other questions of capacity in multiplication,
division, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 14. Selector.]

In the language of logic (see Chapter 9 and Supplement 2), if _p_,
_a_, _b_, _c_ are the information in X Pickup, Common, X, and No X,
respectively, then the equations for a selector are:

    _b_ = _a_·_p_

    _c_ = _a_·(1 - _p_)

Returning now to the table we wish to make, we connect columns 30 to
36 of the punch card to Common. We connect column 79 of the punch card
to the X Pickup. We connect the output No X to the males column of the
table. We connect the output X to the females column of the table. In
this way we make the number in the punch card appear in either one of
two places in the table according to whether the number counts males or
females.

We might mention several more properties of selectors. A selector can
be used in the reverse way, with X Pickup, X, and No X as inputs and
Common as output (Fig. 15). What will come out of Common is (1) what
goes into input No X if there is no X punch in the column to which
input X Pickup is wired, and (2) what goes into input X if there is an
X punch in the column to which input X Pickup is wired.

In this case the logical equation for the selector is:

    _a_ = _bp_ + _c_(1 - _p_)

Also, selectors can be used one after another, so that selecting based
on 2 or 3 X punches can be made.

[Illustration: FIG. 15. Selector.]

In the language of logic, if _p_, _q_, _r_ are the truth values of
“there is an X punch in column _i_, _j_, _k_,” respectively, then by
means of selectors we can get such a function as:

    _c_ = _apq_ + _b_(1 - _q_)(1 - _r_)

Also, a selector may often be energized not only by an X punch but
also by a punch 0, 1, 2, ···, 9 and 12. In this case, the selector is
equipped with an additional input that can respond to any digit. This
input is called the Digit Pickup.


Digit Selector

Something like an ordinary selector is another mechanism called a
_digit selector_ (Fig. 16). This has one input, Common, and 12 outputs,
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12. This mechanism is often included
in the tabulator and may be included in other punch-card machines. For
example, suppose that we want to do something if and only if column 62
of a punch card contains a 3 or a 4 or a 9. Then we connect a brush
that reads column 62 of the punch card to the Common input of the digit
selector. And we connect out from the digit selector jointly from
outputs 3, 4, and 9.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. Digit selector.]

In the language of logic, if _a_ is the digit going into Common, and if
_p_ is the impulse coming out of the digit selector, then the equation
of the mechanism in this case is:

    _p_ = _T_(_a_ = 3, 4, 9)


Sequencer

A fourth operation of reasoning done by punch-card machines is finding
that one number is greater than, or equal to, or less than another.
This operation is done in the collator and may be called _sequencing_.
For example, suppose that we have a file of punch cards for cities,
showing in columns 41 to 48 the number of people. Suppose that we wish
to pick out the cards for cities over 125,000 in population. Now the
collator has a mechanism that has 2 inputs and 3 outputs (Fig. 17). We
may call this mechanism a _sequencer_, since it can tell the sequence
of two numbers. What goes into the _Primary_ input is a number: let us
call it _a_. What goes into _Secondary_ is another number: let us call
it _b_. An impulse comes out of _Low Primary_ if _a_ is less than _b_.
An impulse comes out of _Equal_ if _a_ equals _b_. An impulse comes out
of _Low Secondary_ if _a_ is greater than _b_.

[Illustration: FIG. 17. Sequencer.]

In the language of logic, if _p_, _q_, _r_ are the three indications in
Low Primary, Equal, and Low Secondary, then:

    _p_ = _T_(_a_ < _b_)

    _q_ = _T_(_a_ = _b_)

    _r_ = _T_(_a_ > _b_)

Returning to our example, we punch up a card with 125,000 in columns 43
to 48, and we put this card into the Secondary Feed. We take the punch
cards for cities and put them into the Primary Feed. In the plugboard,
we connect the hubs of the Secondary Brushes (that read the card in
the Secondary Feed), columns 43 to 48, to the Secondary input of the
Sequencer. We connect the hubs of the Primary Brushes (that read the
card in the Primary Feed), columns 41 to 48, to the Primary input of
the Sequencer. Then we connect the Low Primary output of the Sequencer
to a device that causes the city card being examined to fall into
pocket 1. We connect Equal output and Low Secondary output to a device
that causes the city card being examined to fall into pocket 2. Then,
when the card for any city comes along, the machine compares the number
of people in the city with 125,000. If the number is greater than
125,000, the card will fall into pocket 1; otherwise the card will fall
into pocket 2. At the end of the run, we shall find in pocket 1 all the
cards we want.


NEW DEVELOPMENTS

We may expect to see over the next few years major developments in
punch-card machinery. It would seem likely that types of punch-card
machines like the following might be constructed:

    A punch-card machine that performs any arithmetical or
      logical operation at high speed and may perform a dozen
      such operations in sequence during the time that a punch
      card passes through the machine.

    A punch-card machine that uses loops of punched paper
      tape, which express either a sequence of values in a table
      that the machine can consult or a sequence of instructions
      that govern the operations of the machine.

    Punch-card machinery that uses a larger card than the
      80-column card.

    A punch-card machine that may have a fairly large amount
      of internal memory, perhaps 30 or 40 registers where
      numbers or words may be stored and referred to.


SPEED

The speed of various operations with present IBM punch-card machines is
about as shown in the table.

       MACHINE             OPERATION                     TIME IN SECONDS
    Key punch          Punch 80 columns                   About 20 to 40
    Verifier           Check 80 columns                   About 20 to 40
    Sorter             Sort 1 card on 1 column                 0.15
    Interpreter        Print 1 line                            0.8
    Reproducer         Reproduce a card, all 80 columns        0.6
    Collator           Merge 2 cards                           0.25
    Multiplying punch  Multiply by 8 digits                    5.6
    Calculating punch  Add                                     0.3
    Calculating punch  Multiply by 8 digits                    3.6
    Calculating punch  Divide, obtaining 8 quotient digits     9.0
    Tabulator          Print 1 line, numbers only              0.4
    Tabulator          Print 1 line, letters included          0.75
    Tabulator          Add numbers from 1 card                 0.4


COST

Punch-card machines may be either rented or purchased from some
manufacturers but only rented from others. If we take the cost of a
clerk as $120 to $150 a month, the monthly rent of most punch-card
machines ranges from ⅒ of the cost of a clerk for the simplest type
of machine, such as a key punch, to 3 times the cost of a clerk for a
complicated and versatile type of machine, such as a tabulator with
many attachments. The rental basis is naturally convenient for many
kinds of jobs.


RELIABILITY

The reliability of work with punch cards and punch-card machines is
often much better than 99 per cent: in 10,000 operations, failures
should be less than 2 or 3. This is, of course, much better than with
clerical operations.

There are a number of causes for machine or card failures. Sometimes
cards may be warped and may not feed into the machines properly. Or,
the air in the room may be very dry, and static electricity may make
the cards stick together. Or, the air may be too humid; the cards may
swell slightly and may jam in the machine. A punch may get slightly
out of true alignment, and punches in the cards may be slightly off. A
relay may get dust on its contact points and, from time to time, fail
to perform in the right way. Considerable engineering effort has been
put into remedying these and other troubles, with much success.

To make sure that we have correct results from human beings working
with punch-card machines, we may verify each process. Information
that is punched on the key punch may be verified on the verifier.
Multiplications done with multiplicand _a_ and multiplier _b_ may be
repeated and compared with multiplications done with multiplicand _b_
and multiplier _a_. Cards that are sorted on the sorter may be put
through the collator to make sure that their sequence is correct. It
is often good to plan every operation so that we have a proof that the
result is right.

It is standard practice to have the machines inspected regularly in
order to keep them operating properly. On the average, for every 50 to
75 machines, there will be one full-time service man maintaining them
and taking care of calls for repairs. Of course, as with any machinery,
some service calls will be a result of the human element; for example,
a problem may have been set up wrongly on a machine.


GENERAL USEFULNESS

Punch-card calculations are much faster and more accurate than hand
calculations. With punch cards, work is organized so that all cases
are handled at the same time in the same way. This process is very
different from handling each case separately from start to finish. As
soon as the number of cases to be handled is more than a hundred and
each item of information is to be used five or more times, punch cards
are likely to be advantageous, provided other factors are favorable.
Vast quantities of information have been handled very successfully by
punch-card machines. Over 30 scientific and engineering laboratories in
the United States are doing computation by punch cards. Over a billion
punch cards, in fact, are used annually in this country.




Chapter 5

MEASURING:

MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY’S

DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER NO. 2


In the previous chapter we talked about machines that move information
expressed as holes in cards. In this chapter we shall talk about
machines that move information expressed as measurements.


ANALOGUE MACHINES

A simple example of a device that uses a measurement to handle
information is a doorpost. Here the height of a child may be marked
from year to year as he grows (Fig. 1). Or, suppose that we have a
globe of the world and wish to find the shortest path between Chicago
and Moscow. We may lay a piece of string on the globe, pull it tight
between those points, and then measure the string on a scale to see
about what distance it shows (Fig. 2).

Machines that handle information as measurements of physical quantities
are called _analogue_ machines, because the measurement is _analogous_
to, or like, the information. A common example of analogue machine
is the _slide rule_. With this we calculate by noting the positions
of ruled lines on strips that slide by each other. These strips are
made of fine wood, or of plastic, or of steel, in such fashion that
the ruled lines will hold true positions and not warp. If we space
the rulings so that 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 ··· are equally spaced, then the
slide rule is useful for addition (Fig. 3). But if we space the rulings
so that _powers_ (for example, powers of two—1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 ···)
(Fig. 4) are equally spaced, we can do multiplication. The spacings
are then according to the _logarithms_ of numbers (see Supplement 2).
Multiplication is more troublesome than addition, and so more slide
rules are made for multiplication than for addition.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Measurement by doorpost.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Measurement by string.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Slide Rule for adding.]

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Slide Rule for multiplying.]

During World War II, the aiming and firing of guns against hostile
planes was done by machine. After sighting a plane, these machines
automatically calculated how to direct fire against it. They were
much better and faster than any man. These _fire-control instruments_
were analogue machines with steel and electrical parts built to fine
tolerances. With care we can get accuracy of 1 part in 10,000 with
analogue machines, but greater accuracy is very hard to get.


PHYSICAL QUANTITIES

Suppose that we wish to make an analogue machine. We need to represent
information by a measurement of something. What should we select?
What physical thing to be measured should we choose to put into the
machine? Different amounts of this _physical quantity_ will match with
different amounts of the measurement being expressed. In the case of
the doorpost, the string, and the slide rule, the physical quantity
is distance. In many fire-control instruments, the physical quantity
is the _amount of turning of a shaft_ (Fig. 5). Many other physical
quantities have from time to time been used in analogue machines,
such as electrical measurements. The speedometer of an automobile
tells distance traveled and speed. It is an analogue machine. It uses
the amount of turning of a wheel, and some electrical properties.
It handles information by means of measurements. The basic physical
quantity that it measures is the amount of turning of a shaft.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Measurement by amount of turning of a shaft.]


DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER

The biggest and cleverest mechanical brain of the analogue type which
has yet been built is the _differential analyzer_ finished in 1942
at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, Mass. The
fundamental physical quantity used in this machine is the amount of
turning of a shaft. The name _analyzer_ means an apparatus or machine
for analyzing or solving problems. It happens that the word “analyzer”
has been used rather more often in connection with analogue machines,
and so in many cases the word “analyzer” carries the meaning “analogue”
as well. The word “differential” in the phrase “differential analyzer”
refers to the main purpose of the machine: it is specially adapted for
solving problems involving _differential equations_. Now what is a
differential equation?


DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS

In order to explain what a differential equation is, we need to use
certain ideas. These ideas are: _equation_; _formula_; _function_;
_rate of change_; _interval_; _derivative_; and _integral_. In the
next few paragraphs, we shall introduce these ideas briefly, with
some explanation and examples. It is entirely possible for anyone to
understand these ideas rather easily, by collecting true statements
about them; no one should feel that because these ideas may be new they
cannot be understood readily.


PHYSICAL PROBLEMS

In physics, chemistry, mechanics, and other sciences there are many
problems in which the behavior of distance, of time, of speed, heat,
volume, electrical current, weight, acceleration, pressure, and many
other _physical quantities_ are related to each other. Examples of such
problems are:

[Illustration: FIG. 6. Paths of a shot from a gun, trajectories.]

    What are the various angles to which a gun should be raised
    in order that it may shoot various distances? (See Fig. 6.)
    (The paths of a shot from a gun are called _trajectories_.)

    If a plane flies in a direction always at the same angle from
    the north, how much farther will it travel than if it flew
    along the shortest path? (See Fig. 7.) (A path always at the same
    angle from the north is called a _loxodrome_, and a shortest
    path on a globe is called a _great circle_.)

    How should an engine be designed so that it will have the least
    vibration when it moves fast?

In _physical problems_ like these, the answer is not a single number
but a _formula_. What we want to do in any one of these problems is
find a formula so that any one of the quantities may be calculated,
given the behavior of the others. For example, here is a familiar
problem in which the answer is a formula and not a number:

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Paths of a flight.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Room formulas.]

    How are the floor area of a room, its length,
    and its width related to each other? (See Fig. 8.)

The answer is told in any one of three _equations_:


    (_floor area_) EQUALS (_length_) TIMES (_width_)

    (_length_) EQUALS (_floor area_) DIVIDED BY (_width_)

    (_width_) EQUALS (_floor area_) DIVIDED BY (_length_)

The first equation shows that the floor area depends on the length of
the room and also on the width of the room. So we say floor area is a
_function_ of length and width. This particular function happens to be
_product_, the result of multiplication. In other words, floor area is
equal to the product of length and width.

Now there is another kind of function called a _differential function_
or _derivative_. A _differential function_ or _derivative_ is an
_instantaneous rate of change_. An instantaneous rate of change
is the result of two steps: (1) finding a rate of change over an
_interval_ and then (2) letting the interval become smaller and smaller
indefinitely. For example, suppose that we have the problem:

    How are speed, distance, and time related to each other?

One of the answers is:

    (_speed_) EQUALS THE INSTANTANEOUS RATE OF CHANGE OF (_distance_)
              WITH RESPECT TO (_time_)

Or we can say, and it is just the same thing in other words:

    (_speed_) EQUALS THE DERIVATIVE OF (_distance_)
              WITH RESPECT TO (_time_)

Now we can tell what a differential equation is. It is simply an
equation in which a derivative occurs, such as the last example.
Perhaps the commonest kind of equation in physical problems is the
differential equation.


SOLVING PHYSICAL PROBLEMS

Now we were able to change the equation about floor area into other
forms, if we wanted to find length or width instead of floor area. When
we did this, we ran into the _inverse_ or opposite of multiplication:
division.

In the same way, we can change the equation about speed into other
forms, if we want to find distance or time instead of speed. If we
do this, we run into a new idea, the inverse or opposite of the
derivative, called _integral_. The two new equations are:

    (_distance_) EQUALS THE INTEGRAL OF (_speed_)
                 WITH RESPECT TO (_time_)

    (_time_) EQUALS THE INTEGRAL OF [ONE DIVIDED BY (_speed_)]
             WITH RESPECT TO (_distance_)

These equations may also be called differential equations.

An integral is the result of a process called _integrating_. To
integrate speed and get distance is the result of three steps: (1)
breaking up an interval of time into a large number of small bits, (2)
adding up all the small distances that we get by taking each bit of
time and multiplying by the speed which applied in that bit of time,
and (3) letting the bits of time get smaller and smaller, and letting
the number of them get larger and larger, indefinitely.

In other words,

    (_total distance_) EQUALS THE SUM OF ALL THE SMALL (_distances_),
       EACH EQUAL TO: A BIT OF (_time_)
       MULTIPLIED BY THE (_speed_) APPLYING TO THAT BIT

This is another way of saying as before,

    (_distance_) EQUALS THE INTEGRAL OF (_speed_)
                 WITH RESPECT TO (_time_)

To solve a differential equation, we almost always need to integrate
one or more quantities.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER

For at least two centuries, solving differential equations to answer
physical problems has been a main job for mathematicians. Mathematics
is supposed to be logical, and perhaps you would think this would
be easy. But mathematicians have been unable to solve a great many
differential equations; only here and there, as if by accident, could
they solve one. So they often wished for better methods in order to
make the job easier.

A British mathematician and physicist, William Thomson (Lord Kelvin),
in 1879 suggested solving differential equations by a machine. He went
further: he described mechanisms for integrating and other mathematical
processes, and how these mechanisms could be connected together in a
machine. No such machine was then built; engineering in those years
was not equal to it. In 1923, a machine of this type for solving the
differential equations of trajectories was proposed by L. Wainwright.

In 1925, at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the problem of a
machine to solve differential equations was again being studied by Dr.
Vannevar Bush and his associates. Dr. Bush experimented with mechanisms
that would integrate, add, multiply, etc., and methods of connecting
them together in a machine. A major part of the success of the machine
depended on a device whereby a very small turning force would do a
rather large amount of work. He developed a way in which the small
turning force, about as small as a puff of breath, could be used to
tighten a string around a drum already turning with a considerable
force, and thus clutch the drum, bring in that force, and do the work
that needed to be done. You may have watched a ship being loaded, seen
a man coil a rope around a _winch_, and watched him swing a heavy load
into the air by a slight pull on the rope (Fig. 9). If so, you have
seen this same principle at work. The turning force (or _torque_) that
pulls on the rope is greatly increased (or _amplified_) by such a
mechanism, and so we call it a _torque amplifier_.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Increasing turning force; winch, or torque
amplifier.]

By 1930, Dr. Bush and his group had finished the first differential
analyzer. It was entirely mechanical, having no electrical parts except
the motors. It was so successful that a number of engineering schools
and manufacturing businesses have since then built other machines of
the Bush type. Each time, some improvements were made in accuracy and
capacity for solving problems. But, if you changed from one problem
to another on this type of machine, you had to do a lot of work with
screwdrivers and wrenches. You had to undo old mechanical connections
between shafts and set up new ones. Accordingly, in 1935, the men at
MIT started designing a second differential analyzer. In this one you
could make all the connections electrically.

MIT finished its second differential analyzer in 1942, but the fact
was not published during World War II, for the machine was put to work
on important military problems. In fact, a rumor spread and was never
denied that the machine was a white elephant and would not work. The
machine was officially announced in October 1945. It was the most
advanced and efficient differential analyzer ever built. We shall
talk chiefly about it for the rest of this chapter. A good technical
description of this machine is in a paper, “A New Type of Differential
Analyzer,” by Vannevar Bush and Samuel H. Caldwell, published in the
_Journal of the Franklin Institute_ for October 1945.


GENERAL ORGANIZATION OF MIT DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER NO. 2

A differential analyzer is basically made up of shafts that turn.
When we set up the machine to solve a differential equation, we
assign one shaft in the machine to each quantity referred to in the
equation. It is the job of that shaft to keep track of that quantity.
The total amount of turning of that shaft at any time while the
problem is running measures the size of that quantity at that time.
If the quantity decreases, the shaft turns in the opposite direction.
For example, if we have speed, time, and distance in a differential
equation, we label one shaft “speed,” another shaft “time,” and another
shaft “distance.” If we wish, we may assign 10 turns of the “time”
shaft to mean “one second,” 2 turns of the “distance” shaft to mean
“one foot,” and 4 turns of the “speed” shaft to mean “one foot per
second.” These are called _scale factors_. We could, however, use any
other convenient units that we wished.

By just looking at a shaft or a wheel, we can tell what part of a
full turn it has made—a half, or a quarter, or some other part—but we
cannot tell by looking how many full turns it has made. In the machine,
therefore, there are mechanisms that record not only full turns but
also tenths of turns. These are called _counters_. We can connect a
counter to any shaft. When we want to know some quantity that a shaft
and counter are keeping track of, we read the counting mechanism.

The second differential analyzer, which MIT finished in 1942, went a
step further than any previous one. In this machine, a varying number
can be expressed either (1) mechanically as the amount of turning of
a shaft, or (2) electrically as the amount of two _voltages_ in a
pair of wires. The MIT men did this by means of a mechanism called an
_angle-indicator_.

Angle indicators have essentially three parts: a _transmitter_, a
_receiver_, and switches. The transmitter (Fig. 10) can sense the exact
amount that a shaft has turned and give out a voltage in each of two
wires which tells exactly how much the shaft has turned (Fig. 11). The
receiving device (Fig. 12), which has a motor, can take in the voltages
in the two wires and drive a second shaft, making it turn in step with
the first shaft. By means of the switchboard (Fig. 13), the two wires
from the transmitter of any angle-indicator can lead anywhere in the
machine and be connected to the receiver of any other angle indicator.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. Scheme of angle-indicator transmitter.]

[Illustration: FIG. 11. Indication of angle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12. Scheme of angle-indicator receiver.]

In a differential analyzer, we can connect the shafts together in many
different ways. For example, suppose that we want one shaft _b_ to
turn twice as much as another shaft _a_. For this to happen we must
have a mechanism that will connect shaft _a_ to shaft _b_ and make
shaft _b_ turn twice as much as shaft _a_. We can draw the scheme of
this mechanism in Fig. 14: a box, standing for any kind of simple or
complicated mechanism; a line going into it, standing for input of
the quantity _a_; a line going out of it, standing for output of the
quantity _b_; and a statement saying that _b_ equals 2_a_.

[Illustration: FIG. 13. Switchboard.]

One mechanism that will make shaft _b_ turn twice as much as shaft _a_
is a _pair of gears_ such that: (1) they mesh together and (2) the gear
on shaft _a_ has twice as many teeth as the gear on shaft _b_ (Fig.
15). On the mechanical differential analyzer that MIT finished in 1930,
a pair of gears was the mechanism actually used for doubling. To make
one shaft turn twice as much as another by this device, we would: go
over to the machine with a screwdriver; pick out from a box two gears,
one with twice as many teeth as the other; slide them onto the shafts
that are to be connected; make the gears mesh together; and screw them
tight on their shafts.

[Illustration: FIG. 14. Scheme of a doubling mechanism.]

[Illustration: FIG. 15. Example of a doubling mechanism.]

On the MIT differential analyzer No. 2, however, we are better off. A
much more convenient device for doubling is used. We make use of: a
_gearbox_ in whichthere are two shafts that may be geared so that one
turns twice as much as the other, and two angle-indicator transmitters
and receivers. Looking at the drawing (Fig. 16), we can see that: shaft
_a_ drives shaft _c_ to turn in step, shaft _c_ drives shaft _d_ to
turn twice as much, and shaft _d_ drives shaft _b_ to turn in step.
Here we can accomplish doubling by closing the pairs of switches that
connect to the gearbox shafts.

[Illustration: Angle indicators: T, transmitters, and R, receivers

FIG. 16. Another example of a doubling mechanism.]

Above, we have talked about a mechanism with gears that would multiply
the amount of turning by the _constant ratio_ 2. But, of course, in a
calculation, any ratio, say 7.65, 3.142, ···, might be needed, not only
2. In order to handle various constant ratios, gearboxes of two kinds
are in differential analyzer No. 2. The first kind is a _one-digit
gearbox_. It can be set to give any of 10 ratios, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, ···,
1.0. The second kind is a _four-digit gearbox_. It can be set to give
any one of more than 11 thousand ratios, 0.0000, 0.0001, 0.0002, ···,
1.1109, 1.1110. We can thus multiply by constant ratios.


Adders

We come now to a new mechanism, whose purpose is to add or subtract the
amount of turning of two shafts. It is called an _adder_. The scheme
of it is shown in Fig. 17: an input shaft with amount of turning _a_,
another input shaft with amount of turning _b_, and an output shaft
with amount of turning _a_ + _b_. The adder essentially is another
kind of gearbox, called a _differential gear assembly_. This name is
confusing: the word “differential” here has nothing to do with the
word “differential” in “differential analyzer.” This mechanism is very
closely related to the “differential” in the rear axle of a motor car,
which distributes a driving thrust from the motor to the two rear
wheels of the car.

[Illustration: FIG. 17. Scheme of an adder mechanism.]

[Illustration: FIG. 18. Example of an adding mechanism (differential
gear assembly).]

A type of differential gear assembly that will add is shown in Fig. 18.
This is a set of 5 gears _A_ to _E_. The 2 gears _A_ and _B_ are input
gears. The amount of their turning is _a_ and _b_, respectively. They
both mesh with a third gear, _C_, free to turn, but the axis of _C_
is fastened to the inside rim of a fourth, larger gear, _D_. Thus _D_
is driven, and the amount of its turning is (_a_ + _b_)/2. This gear
meshes with a gear _E_ with half the number of teeth, and so the amount
of turning of _E_ is _a_ + _b_.

We can subtract the turning of one shaft from the turning of another
simply by turning one of the input shafts in the opposite direction.


Integrators

Another mechanism in a differential analyzer, and the one that makes
it worth while to build the machine, is called an _integrator_. This
mechanism carries out the process of integrating, of adding up a very
large number of small changing quantities. Figure 19 shows what an
integrator is. It has three chief parts: a _disc_, a little _wheel_,
and a _screw_. The round disc turns horizontally on its vertical shaft.
The wheel rests on the disc and turns vertically on its horizontal
shaft. The screw goes through the support of the disc; when the screw
turns, it changes the distance between the edge of the wheel and the
center of the disc.

[Illustration: FIG. 19. Mechanism of integrator.]

Now let us watch this mechanism move. If the disc turns a little bit,
the wheel pressing on it must turn a little bit. If the screw turns a
small amount, the distance between the edge of the wheel and the center
of the disc changes. The amount that the wheel turns is doubled if its
distance from the center of the disc is doubled, and halved if that
distance is halved. So we see that:

    (_the total amount that the wheel turns_) EQUALS
       THE SUM OF ALL THE SMALL (_amounts of turning_),
       EACH EQUAL TO: A BIT OF (_disc turning_)
       MULTIPLIED BY THE (_distance from the center
       of the disc to the edge of the wheel_) APPLYING
       TO THAT BIT

If we look back at our discussion of integrating (p. 72), we see that
the capital words here are just the same as those used there. Thus we
have a mechanism that expresses integration:

    (_the total amount that the wheel turns_) EQUALS THE INTEGRAL OF
         (_the distance from the center of the disc to the wheel_)
         WITH RESPECT TO (_the amount that the disc turns_)

The scheme of this mechanism is shown in Fig. 20.

For example, suppose that the screw measures the speed at which a car
travels and that the disc measures time. The wheel, consequently, will
measure distance traveled by the car. The mechanism INTEGRATES speed
with respect to time and gives distance.

[Illustration: FIG. 20. Scheme of integrator.]

This mechanism is the device that Lord Kelvin talked about in 1879 and
that Dr. Bush made practical in 1925. The mechanical difficulty is to
make the friction between the disc and the wheel turn the wheel with
enough force to do other work. In the second differential analyzer, the
angle indicator set on the shaft of the wheel solves the problem very
neatly.

[Illustration: FIG. 21. Graph of air resistance coefficient.]


Function Tables

The behavior of some physical quantities can be described only by a
series of numbers or a graphic curve. For example, the _resistance_ or
_drag_ of the air against a passing object is related to the speed of
the object in a rather complicated way. Part of the relation is called
the _drag coefficient_ or _resistance coefficient_; a rough graph of
this is shown in Fig. 21. This graph shows several interesting facts:
(1) when the object is still, there is no air resistance; (2) as it
travels faster and faster, air resistance rapidly increases; (3) when
the object travels with the speed of sound, resistance is very great
and increases enormously; (4) but, when the object starts traveling
with a speed about 20 per cent faster than sound, the drag coefficient
begins to decrease. This drawing or _graph_ shows in part how air
resistance depends on speed of object; in other words, it shows the
drag coefficient as a _function_ of speed (see Supplement 2).

[Illustration: FIG. 22. Pointer following graph.]

Now we need a way of putting any function we wish into a differential
analyzer. To do this, we use a mechanism called a _function table_. We
draw a careful graph of the function according to the scale we wish to
use, and we set the graph on the outside of a large drum (Fig. 22).
For example, we can put the resistance coefficient graph on the drum;
the speed (or _independent variable_) goes around the drum, and the
resistance coefficient (or _dependent variable_) goes along the drum.
The machine slowly turns the drum, as may be called for by the problem.
A girl sits at the function table and watches, turning a handwheel
that keeps the sighting circle of a pointer right over the graph. The
turning of the handwheel puts the graphed function into the machine.
Instead of employing a person, we can make one side of the graph black,
leaving the other side white, and put in a _phototube_ (an electronic
tube sensitive to amount of light) that will steer from pure black or
pure white to half and half (see Fig. 23).

We do not need many function tables to put in information, because we
can often use integrators in neat combinations to avoid them. We shall
say more about this possibility later.

We can also use a function table to put out information and to draw a
graph. To do so, we disconnect the handwheel; we connect the shaft of
the handwheel to the shaft that records the function we are interested
in; we take out the pointer and put in a pen; and we put a blank sheet
of graph paper around the drum.

[Illustration: FIG. 23. Phototube following graph.]

We have now described the main parts of the second MIT differential
analyzer. They are the parts that handle numbers. We can now tell the
capacity of the differential analyzer by telling the number of main
parts that it holds:

    Shafts                About 130
    One-digit gearboxes          12
    Four-digit gearboxes         16
    Adders                About  16
    Integrators                  18
    Function tables               3

On a simpler level, we can say that the machine holds these physical
parts:

    Miles of wire        About  200
    Relays               About 3000
    Motors               About  150
    Electronic tubes     About 2000


INSTRUCTING THE MIT DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER NO. 2

Besides the function tables for putting information into the machine,
there are three mechanisms that read punched paper tape. The three
tapes are called the _A tape_, the _B tape_, and the _C tape_. From
these tapes the machine is set up to solve a problem.

Suppose that we have decided how the machine is to solve a problem.
Suppose that we know the number of integrators, adders, gearboxes,
etc., that must be used, and know how their inputs and outputs are
to be connected. To carry out the solution, we now have to put the
instructions and numbers into the machine.

The _A_ tape contains instructions for connecting shafts in the
machine. Each instruction connects a certain output of one type
of mechanism (adder, etc.) to a certain input of another type of
mechanism. When the machine reads an instruction on this tape, it
connects electrically the transmitting angle-indicator of an output
shaft to the receiving angle-indicator of another input shaft.

Now the connecting part of the differential analyzer behaves as if
it were very intelligent: it assigns an adder or an integrator or a
gearbox, etc., to a new problem only if that mechanism is not busy. For
example, if a problem tape calls for adder 3 (in the list belonging to
the problem), the machine will assign the first adder that is not busy,
perhaps adder 14 (in the machine), to do the work. Each time that adder
3 (in the problem list) is called for in the _A_ tape, the machine
remembers that adder 14 was chosen and assigns it over again. This
ability, of course, is very useful.

The _B_ tape contains the ratios at which the gearboxes are to be set.
For example, suppose that we want gearbox 4 (in the problem list) to
change its input by the ratio of 0.2573. The machine, after reading the
_A_ tape, has assigned gearbox 11 (in the machine list). Then, when the
machine reads the _B_ tape, it sets the ratio in gearbox 11 to 0.2573.

The answer to a differential equation is different for different
starting conditions. For example, when we know speed and time and wish
to find distance traveled and where we have arrived, we must know the
point at which we started. We therefore need to arrange the machine so
that we can put in different starting conditions (or different _initial
conditions_, as the mathematician calls them).

The _C_ tape puts the initial conditions into the machine. For example,
reading the _C_ tape for the problem, the machine finds that 3000
should, at the start of the problem, stand in counter 4. The machine
then reads the number at which counter 4 actually stands, say 6728.3.
It subtracts the two numbers and remembers the difference, -3728.3.
And whenever the machine reads that counter later, finding, say, 9468.4
in it, first the 3728.3 is subtracted, and then the answer 5740.1 is
printed.


ANSWERS

Information may come out of the machine in either one of two ways: in
printed numbers or in a graph. In fact, the same quantity may come out
of the machine in both ways at the same time. To obtain a graph, we
change a function table from input to output, put a pen on it, and have
it draw the graph.

The machine has 3 electric typewriters. The machine will take numerical
information out of the counters at high speed even while they are
turning, and it will put the information into relays. Then it will read
from the relays into the typewriter keys one by one while they type
from left to right across the page.


HOW THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER CALCULATES

Up to this point in this chapter, the author has tried to tell the
story of the differential analyzer in plain words. But for reading
this section, a little knowledge of calculus is necessary. (See also
Supplement 2.) If you wish, skip this section, and go on to the next
one.

We have described how varying quantities, or _variables_, are operated
on in the machine in one way or another: adding, subtracting,
multiplying by a constant, referring to a table, and integrating. What
do we do if we wish to multiply 2 variables together? A neat trick is
to use the formula:

    _xy_ = ⌠_x dy_ + ⌠_y dx_
           ⌡         ⌡

To multiply in this way requires 2 integrators and 1 adder. The
connections that are made between them are as follows:

    Shaft _x_           To Integrator 1, Screw
    Shaft _x_           To Integrator 2, Disc
    Shaft _y_           To Integrator 1, Disc
    Shaft _y_           To Integrator 2, Screw
    Integrator 1, Wheel      To Adder 1, Input 1
    Integrator 2, Wheel      To Adder 1, Input 2
    Adder 1, Output          To Shaft expressing _xy_

A product of 2 variables _under the integral sign_ can be obtained a
little more easily, because of the curious powers of the differential
analyzer. Thus, if it is desired to obtain ∫_xy dt_, we can use the
formula:

                      ┌          ┐
    ⌠           ⌠     │ ⌠        │
    │_xy dt_ =  │_x d_│ │ _y dt_ │
    ⌡           ⌡     │ ⌡        │
                      └          ┘

and this operation does not require an adder. The connections are as
follows:

    Shaft _t_               To Integrator 1, Disc
    Shaft _y_               To Integrator 1, Screw
    Integrator 1, Wheel          To Integrator 2, Disc
    Shaft _x_               To Integrator 2, Screw
    Integrator 2, Wheel     To Shaft expressing ∫_xy dt_

In order to get the quotient of 2 variables, _x_/_y_, we can use some
more tricks. First, the _reciprocal_ 1/_y_ can be obtained by using the
two _simultaneous equations_:

    ⌠   1                  ⌠     1
    │ ———— _dy_ = log _y_, │ - ———— _d_(log _y_) = _y_
    ⌡  _y_                 ⌡    _y_

The connections are as follows:

    Shaft _y_       To Integrator 1, Disc AND TO Integrator 2, Wheel
    Shaft log _y_   To Integrator 1, Wheel AND TO Integrator 2, Disc
    Shaft 1/_y_     To Integrator 1, Screw, AND NEGATIVELY
                                            TO Integrator 2, Screw

In order to get _x_/_y_, we can then multiply _x_ by 1/_y_. We see that
this setup gives us log _y_ for nothing, that is, without needing more
integrators or other equipment. Clearly, other tricks like this will
give sin _x_, cos _x_, _eˣ_, _x²_, and other functions that satisfy
simple differential equations.

An integral of a reciprocal can be obtained even more directly. Suppose
that

          ⌠   1
    _y_ = │ ————— _dt_
          ⌡  _x_

                  1
    Then _Dₜy_ = —————, _D{_y} t_ = _x_,
                 _x_

              ⌠
    and _t_ = │_x dy_
              ⌡

The connections therefore are:

    Shaft _t_   To Integrator, Wheel
    Shaft _x_   To Integrator, Screw
    Shaft _y_   To Integrator, Disc

The light wheel then drives the heavy disc. Clearly only the
angle-indicator device makes this possible at all. Naturally, the
closer the wheel gets to the center of the disc, that is, _x_
approaching zero, the greater the strain on the mechanism, and the more
likely the result is to be off. Mathematically, of course, the limit of
1/_x_ as _x_ approaches zero equals infinity, and this gives trouble in
the machine.

There is no standard mathematical method for solving any differential
equation. But the machine provides a standard direct method for
solving all differential equations with only one independent variable.
First: assign a shaft for each _term_ that appears in the equation.
For example, the highest derivative that appears and the independent
variable are both assigned shafts. The integral of the highest
derivative is easily obtained, and the integral of that integral, etc.
Second: connect the shafts so that all the mathematical relations are
expressed. Both _explicit_ and _implicit_ equations may be expressed.
Third: for any shaft there must be just one _drive_, or source of
torque. A shaft may, however, drive more than one other shaft. Fourth:
choose _scale factors_ so that the limits of the machine are not
exceeded yet at the same time are well used. For example, the most
that an integrator or a function table can move is 1 or 2 feet. Also,
the number of full turns made by a shaft in representing its variable
should be large, often between 1000 and 10,000.

Of course, as with all these large machines, anyone would need some
months of actual practice before he could put on a problem and get an
answer efficiently.


AN APPRAISAL OF THE MACHINE

The second MIT differential analyzer is probably the best machine
ever built for solving most differential equations. It regularly has
an accuracy of 1 part in 10,000. This is enough for most engineering
problems. If greater accuracy is needed, the second differential
analyzer cannot provide it. Once in a while the machine can reach an
accuracy of 1 part in 50,000; but, to balance this, it is sometimes
less accurate than 1 part in 10,000.

The MIT differential analyzer No. 2 can find answers to problems very
quickly. The time for setting up a problem to be run on the machine
ranges from 5 to 15 minutes. The time for preparing the tapes that
set up the problem is, of course, longer; but the punch for preparing
the tape is a separate machine and does not delay the differential
analyzer. The time for the machine to produce a single solution to a
problem ranges usually from 3 minutes to a half-hour. It is easy to
put on a problem, run a few solutions, take the problem off, study the
results, change a few numbers, and then put the problem back on again.
This virtue is a great help in a search in a new field. While the study
is going on, time is not wasted, for the machine can be busy with a
different problem.

Running a problem a second time is a good check on the reliability of
an answer. For, when the problem is run the second time, we can arrange
that the machine will route the problem to other mechanisms.

The machine has a control panel. Here the operator watching the machine
can tell what units are doing what parts of what problems. If a unit
gives trouble or needs to be inspected, the clerk can throw a “busy”
switch. Then the machine cannot choose that unit for work to be done.
The machine contains many protecting signals and alarms. It is idle for
repairs less than 5 per cent of the time.

It is not easy to determine the total cost of the machine, for it was
partially financed by several large gifts. Also, much of the labor
was done by graduate students in return for the instruction that they
gained. The actual out-of-pocket cost was about $125,000. If the
machine were to be built by industry, the cost would likely be more
than 4 times as much. A simple differential analyzer, however, can be
cheap. Small scale differential analyzers have been built for less than
$1000; their accuracy has been about 1 part in 100.

There are many things that this machine cannot do; it was not built
to do them. (1) It cannot choose methods of solution. (2) It cannot
perform steps in solving a problem that depend on results as they
are found. (3) It cannot solve differential equations containing two
or more independent variables. Such equations are called _partial
differential equations_; they appear in connection with the flow of
heat or air or electricity in 2 or 3 dimensions, and elsewhere. (4)
It cannot solve problems requiring 6 or more digits of accuracy. (5)
The machine, while running, can store numbers only for an instant,
since it operates on the principle of smoothly changing quantities;
however, when the machine stops, the number last held by each device is
permanently stored.

None of these comments, however, are criticisms of the machine.
Instead they show avenues of development for future machines. As was
said before, for solving most differential equations, this machine
has no equal to date. The range of problems which any differential
analyzer can do depends mostly on the number of its integrators. The
second differential analyzer has 18 and provides for expansion to 30.
The machine is constructed, also, so that it can be operated in 3
independent sections, each working to solve a different problem. The
differential analyzer can operate unattended. After it has been set up
and the first few results examined, it can be left alone to grind out
large blocks of answers.

An interesting example of the experimental use of a differential
analyzer in a commercial business is the following: In Great Britain,
R. E. Beard of the Pearl Assurance Company built a differential
analyzer with 6 integrators. He applied this machine to compute to 3
figures certain insurance values known as _continuous annuities_ and
_continuous contingent insurances_. He has described the machine and
the application he made in a paper published in the _Journal of the
Institute of Actuaries_, Vol. 71, 1942, pp. 193-227.




Chapter 6

ACCURACY TO 23 DIGITS:

HARVARD’S IBM AUTOMATIC

SEQUENCE-CONTROLLED CALCULATOR


One of the first giant brains to be finished was the machine in the
Computation Laboratory at Harvard University called the _IBM Automatic
Sequence-Controlled Calculator_. This great mechanical brain started
work in April 1944 and has been running 24 hours a day almost all the
time ever since. It has produced quantities of information for the
United States Navy. Although many problems that have been placed on it
have been classified by the Navy as confidential, the machine itself
is fully public. The way it was working on Sept. 1, 1945, has been
thoroughly described in a 540-page book published in 1946, Volume I of
the Annals of the Harvard Computation Laboratory, entitled _Manual of
Operation of the Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator_. Since then
the machine has been improved in many ways.

This machine does thousands of calculating steps, one after another,
according to a scheme fixed ahead of time. This property is what gives
the machine its name: _automatic_, since the individual operations are
automatic, once the punched tape fixing the chain of operations has
been put on the machine, and _sequence-controlled_, since control over
the sequence of its operations has been built into the machine.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT

More than a hundred years ago, an English mathematician and actuary,
Charles Babbage (1792-1871), designed a machine—or _engine_ as
he called it—that would carry out the sequences of mathematical
operations. In the 1830’s he received a government grant to build
an _analytical engine_ whereby long chains of calculations could be
performed. But he was unsuccessful, because the refined physical
devices necessary for quantities of digital calculation were not
yet developed. Only in the 1930’s did these physical devices become
sufficiently versatile and reliable for a calculator of hundreds of
thousands of parts to be successful.

The Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator at Harvard was largely the
concept of Professor Howard H. Aiken of Harvard. It was built through
a partnership of efforts, ideas, and engineering between him and the
International Business Machines Corporation, in the years 1937 to
1944. The calculator was a gift from IBM to Harvard University. Some
very useful additional control units, named the _Subsidiary Sequence
Mechanism_, were built at the Harvard Computation Laboratory in 1947
and joined to the machine.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Scheme of Harvard IBM Automatic
Sequence-Controlled Calculator.]


GENERAL ORGANIZATION

The machine (see Fig. 1) is about 50 feet long, 8 feet high, and about
2 feet wide. It consists of 22 panels; 17 of them are set in a straight
line, and the last 5 are at the rear of the machine. In the scheme of
the machine shown in Fig. 1, the details you would see in a photograph
have been left out. Instead you see the sections of the machine that
are important because of what they do: _input_, _memory_, _control_,
and _output_. Why do we not see a section labeled “computer”? Because
in this mechanical brain the computing part of the machine is closely
joined to the memory: every storage register can add and subtract. We
shall soon discuss these sections of the machine more fully.


PHYSICAL DEVICES

Now in order for any brain to work, _physical devices_ must be used.
For example, in the human body, a nerve is the physical device that
carries information from one part of the body to another. In the
Harvard machine, an insulated _wire_ is the physical device that
carries information from one part of the machine to another. One side
of every panel in the Harvard machine is heavily laden with a great
network of wires. Between the panels, you can see in many places cables
as thick as your arm and containing hundreds of wires. More than 500
miles of wire are used.

The physical devices in the Harvard machine are numerous, as we would
expect. It is perhaps not surprising that this machine has more than
760,000 parts. But, curiously enough, there are only 7 main kinds of
physical devices in the major part of the machine. They are: wire,
_two-position switches_, _two-position relays_ (see Chapter 2),
_ten-position switches_, _ten-position relays_, _buttons_, and _cam
contacts_ (see below). These are the devices that handle information
in the form of electrical impulses. They can be combined by electrical
circuits in a great variety of ways. There are, of course, other kinds
of physical devices that are important, but they are not numerous,
and they have rather simple duties. Looking at the machine, you can
see three examples easily. Physical devices of the first kind convert
punched holes into electrical impulses: 2 _card feeds_, 4 _tape feeds_.
Those of the second kind convert electrical impulses into punched
holes: 1 _card punch_, 1 _tape punch_. Those of the third kind convert
electrical impulses into printed characters: 2 _electric typewriters_.
We can think of a fourth kind of physical device that would be a help,
but, at present writing, it does not yet exist: a device that converts
printed characters into electrical impulses.

The Harvard machine, of course, is complicated. But it is complicated
because of the variety of ways in which relatively simple devices have
been connected together to make a machine that thinks.


Switches

A _two-position switch_ (see Fig. 2) turned by hand connects a wire to
either one of 2 others. These 2 positions may stand for “yes” and “no,”
0 and 1, etc. There are many two-position switches in the machine. A
_ten-position switch_ or _dial switch_ (see Fig. 3) turned by hand
connects the wire running into the center of the switch with a wire at
any one of ten positions 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 around the edge.
There are over 1400 dial switches in the machine. How does turning the
pointer on the top of the dial make connection between the center wire
and the edge wire? Under the face of the dial is the part that works, a
short rod of metal fastened to the pointer (shown with dashes in Fig.
3). When the pointer turns, this rod also turns, making the desired
connection.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Two-position switch.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Dial switch.]


Relays

_Two-position relays_—more often called just _relays_ (see Chapter
2)—do the automatic routing of the electrical impulses that cause
computing to take place. Each relay may take 2 positions, open or
closed, and these positions may stand for 0 and 1. There are more than
3000 relays in the Harvard machine.

A magnet pulling one way and a spring pulling the other way are
sufficient in an ordinary relay to give 2 positions, “on” and “off,”
“yes” and “no,” 0 and 1. But how do we make a relay that can hold any
one of 10 positions? Figure 4 shows one scheme for a _ten-position
relay_. The _arm_ can take any one of 10 positions, connecting the
contact _Common_ to any one of the contacts O, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
and 9 so that current can flow. The _gear_ turns all the time. When
an impulse comes in on the _Pickup_ line, the _clutch_ connects the
arm to the gear. When an impulse comes in on the _Drop-out_ line, the
clutch disconnects the arm from the gear. For example, suppose that the
ten-position relay is stopped at contact 2, as shown. Suppose that we
now pick up the relay, hold it just long enough to turn 3 steps, and
then drop it out. The relay will now rest at contact 5.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Scheme of a ten-position relay, or counter
position.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5. Scheme of a counter wheel.]

In the Harvard machine, the ten-position relays, much like the scheme
shown, do the same work as _counter wheels_ (Fig. 5) in an ordinary
desk calculating machine, and so they are often spoken of as _counter
positions_ in the Harvard machine. They are very useful in the machine
not only because they express the 10 decimal digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9 but also because adding and subtracting numbers is
accomplished by turning them through the proper number of steps. In
fact, an additional impulse is provided when the counter position turns
from 9 to 0, for purposes of carry. A group of 24 counter positions
makes up each _storage counter_—or _storage register_—in the machine.
There are 2200 of these counter positions. Each is connected to a
continuously running gear on a small shaft (Fig. 6). All these shafts
are connected by other gears and shafts to a main drive shaft, and they
are driven by a 5-horsepower motor at the back of the machine. When
a counter position is supposed to step, a clutch connects the drive
to the running gear, and the counter position steps. When the counter
position is supposed to stay unchanged, the clutch is disconnected
and the driving gear runs free. In fact, when you first approach the
Harvard machine, about the first thing you are aware of is the running
of these gears and the intermittent whirring and clicking of the
counter positions as they step. The machine gives a fine impression of
being busy!

[Illustration: FIG. 6. Scheme of counter 16.]


Timing Contacts

A _button_ (see Fig. 7) is a device for closing an electric circuit
when and only when you push it. A simple example is the button for
ringing a bell: you push the button, a circuit is closed, and something
happens. When you let go, the circuit is opened. The Harvard machine
has a button for starting, a button for stopping, and many others.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. Button.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8. Cam, with 5 lobes and contact.]

A _cam contact_ (see Fig. 8) is an automatic device for closing an
electric circuit for just a short interval of time. When the lobes
on the cam strike the contact, it closes and current flows. When the
lobes have gone by, the spring pushes open the contact, and no current
flows. Just as a two-position relay is the automatic equivalent of
a two-position switch, and a ten-position relay is the automatic
equivalent of a ten-position switch, so a cam contact is the automatic
equivalent of a button.

All the cams in the machine have 20 pockets where small round metal
lobes may or may not be inserted. Each cam makes a full turn once in
³/₁₀ of a second and is in time with all the others. Thus we can time
all the electrical circuits in the machine in units of ³/₂₀₀ of a
second.


NUMBERS

Numbers in the machine regularly consist of 23 decimal digits. The 24th
numerical position at the left in any register contains only 0 for a
positive number and only 9 for a negative number. _Nines complements_
(see Supplement 2) are used for negative numbers. For example,-00284 is
represented as 999715, supposing that we had 5-digit numbers instead
of 23-digit numbers. The sum of two nines complements is automatically
corrected so that it is still a correct nines complement. The device
that accomplishes this is called _end-around-carry_ (see Supplement 2).
The decimal point is fixed for each problem; in other words, in any
problem, the decimal point is consistently kept in one place, usually
between the 15th and 16th decimal columns from the right.


HOW INFORMATION GOES INTO THE MACHINE

Numerical information may go into the machine in any one of 3 ways: (1)
by regular IBM punch cards, using standard IBM card feeds (panel 16);
(2) by hand-set dial switches (panels 1, 2); and (3) by long loops of
punched tape placed on the value tape feeds (panels 12 to 14). Three
sets of 24 columns each punched on a regular IBM punch card can be
used to send 3 numbers and their signs into the machine in one machine
cycle. This is the fastest way for giving numbers to the machine, but
the most limited; for the cards must be referred to in order and can
be referred to automatically only once. Also, there is the risk that
they may be out of order. A card may be passed through the machine
without reading; this saves some sorting in preparing cards for the
machine. Machines for preparing the cards are regular IBM key punches,
and machines for sorting them after preparation are regular IBM card
sorters.

In panels 1 and 2 there are 60 registers by which unchanging numbers
like 1, or 3.14159265···, or 7.65 may be put into the machine. These
are called the _constant registers_. Each constant register consists of
24 dial switches and contains 23 digits and a sign, 0 if positive and
9 if negative. Whenever the mathematician says a certain constant is
needed for a problem, the operator of the machine walks over to these
panels, and, while the machine is turned off, sets the dial switches
for the number, one by one, by hand. If we need 40 constants of 10
digits each for a problem, then the operator sets 400 dial switches by
hand and makes certain that the remaining 14 switches in each of the 40
constant registers used are either at 0 or 9, depending on the sign of
the number. Only then can he return to start the machine.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. Value tape code.]

The third means by which numerical information can be put into the
machine is the _value tape feeds_, in panels 12, 13, and 14. Here the
machine can consult tables of numbers. The numbers are punched on paper
tape 24 holes wide, made of punch-card stock. Tapes for the value tape
feeds may be prepared by hand or by the machine itself using punch
cards or machine calculation. The tapes use equally spaced _arguments_
(see Supplement 2). The tape punch changes the decimal digits in its
keyboard into the following punching code (see Fig. 9):

    0  0000      5  1100
    1  1000      6  1010
    2  0100      7  1001
    3  0010      8  0110
    4  0001      9  0101

Here the 1 denotes a punched hole and 0 no punched hole, and the 4
columns from left to right of the code correspond to 4 rows of the
paper tape from bottom to top. To make sure the value tape is correct,
the machine itself can read the value tape and check it mathematically
or compare it with punch-card values.


HOW INFORMATION COMES OUT OF THE MACHINE

Information comes out of the machine in any one of three ways: (1) by
punching on IBM cards with a regular IBM card punch that is built into
the machine (panel 17), (2) by typing on paper sheets with electric
typewriters (panels 16 and 17), and (3) by punching paper tape 24 holes
wide of the same kind as is fed into the machine.

Usually, one of the electric typewriters is used to print a result for
a visual check and to print it before the machine makes a specified
check of the value. Then, about 10 seconds later, after the result has
been checked as specified in the machine, the checked result is printed
by the second typewriter. In the second typewriter, a special one-use
carbon ribbon of paper is used to produce copy for publication by a
photographic process.

The card punch writes a number more rapidly than an electric
typewriter. This extra speed is sometimes very useful. However, the
punch’s chief purpose is to record intermediate results on punch cards.
Then, if there is a machine failure, and if the problem has been well
organized, the problem may be run over from these intermediate results,
instead of requiring a return to the original starting information.
The tape punch used for preparing tape by hand can also be operated by
cable from the machine.


HOW INFORMATION IS HANDLED IN THE MACHINE

The machine is a mechanical brain. So, between taking in information
and putting out information, the machine does some “thinking.” It
does this thinking according to instructions. The instructions go
into the machine as: (1) the setting of switches, or (2) the pressing
of buttons, or (3) the wiring of plugboards, or (4) feeding in tape
punched with holes. The instructions are remembered in the machine in
these 4 ways, and we can call these sets of devices the control of the
machine.

To illustrate: One of the buttons pressed for every problem is the
Start Key: when you press it, the machine starts to work on the
problem. One of the switches with which you give instructions is
a switch that turns electric typewriter 1 on or off. One of the
plugboards contains some hubs by which you can tell the machine how
many figures to choose in the quotient when dividing, for clearly you
do not need a quotient of 23 figures every time the machine divides.
You can have 5 choices in any one problem; you can specify them by
plugging, and you can call for any one of 5 choices of quotient size
from time to time during the problem. In many cases, when we wish
the machine to do the same thing for all of a single problem and do
it whenever the occasion arises, we can put the instruction into the
wiring of a plugboard. We use plugboard wiring, for example, in fixing
the decimal point in multiplication, so that the product will read out
properly, and in guiding the operation of the typewriters, so that
printing will take place in the columns where we want it.


Sequence of Steps

The most important part of the control of the machine is the
_sequence-tape feed_ and its _sequence-control tape_. These tell the
machine a great part of what operations are to be performed.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. Sequence-control tape code.]

At the end of the room where the machine is, there is the special tape
punch mentioned above. It holds a big spool of card stock that is thin,
flexible, smooth, and tough. With one keyboard we may prepare value
tape. With another keyboard we prepare the sequence-control tape.
The tape (see Fig. 10) contains places for 24 round punched holes in
each row. Some and only some of these holes are punched. Each row of
punched holes is equivalent to an instruction to the machine and is
called a _line of coding_ or _coding line_. In general, the instruction
has the form:

    Take a number out of Register _A_; put the number
      into Register _B_; and perform operation _C_.

The first group of 8 holes at the left is called the _A field_ or the
_out-field_. Here we tell the machine where a number is to be taken
from. The middle group of 8 holes is called the _B field_ or the
_in-field_. Here we tell the machine where a number is to be put. The
last group of 8 holes is called the _C field_ or the _miscellaneous
field_. Here we tell the machine part or all of the operation that is
to be performed.

To illustrate (see Fig. 10), we have holes 3, 2, 1 punched in the _A_
field, holes 3, 2 punched in the _B_ field, and hole 7 punched in the
_C_ field. Now 321 is the _code_—or machine language, or machine call
number—for storage counter 7; 32 is the code for storage counter 6;
and 7 in the _C_ field is the code (in this case, and generally) for
“Add, and read the next line of coding.” So, if we punch out this line
of coding and put the tape on the machine, we tell the machine to read
the number in counter 7, add it into counter 6, and proceed to the next
line of coding and read that.

The holes in each group of 8 holes from left to right are numbered: 8,
7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. The code 631, for example, means that holes 6, 3,
1 are punched and that no holes are punched at 8, 7, 5, 4, 2. Since it
is more natural, the code is read from left to right, or 631, instead
of from right to left in the sequence 136.

The devices in the machine have _in-codes_, used in the in-field, and
_out-codes_, used in the out-field. For each of the 72 regular storage
counters, the in-code and the out-code are the same. The first 8
storage counters have the codes 1, 2, 21, 3, 31, 32, 321, 4, 41; the
last 2 storage counters, the 71st and the 72nd, have the codes 7321, 74.

The constant registers—often called _constant switches_, or just
_switches_—naturally have only out-codes, since numbers can be entered
into the constant registers only by setting dial switches by hand.
The first 8 constant registers have the out-codes 741, 742, 7421, 743,
7431, 7432, 74321, 75, and the 59th and 60th constant registers have
the out-codes 821, 83.


Transferring, Adding, and Clearing

Each storage counter has the property that any number transferred into
it is added into it. For example, the instruction

    Take the number in switch 741; transfer it into storage register 321

is coded:

    741, 321, 7

The 7 in the third column is an instruction to the sequence-tape feed
to turn up to the next coding line and read it. If any number is
already stored in register 321, the content of 741 will be added to it,
and the total will then be stored in 321.

Resetting or clearing a regular storage register is accomplished by a
coding that is a departure from the usual scheme of “out” and “in.” The
instruction

    Clear register 321; read the next coding line

is coded:

    321, 321, 7

Similarly, you can clear any other regular storage register if you
repeat its code in the out-and in-fields. However, a few of the storage
registers in the machine have special reset codes, and these may occur
in any of the three fields _A_, _B_, _C_.

As the result of a recent modification of the machine, you can easily
double the number in any storage register. For example, the instruction

    Double the number in register 321; read the next coding line

is coded:

    321, 321, 743


Subtracting

If the number in switch 741 is to be subtracted from the number in
storage counter 321, the instruction is changed into:

    Take the negative of the number in switch 741; transfer
      it into storage register 321; read the next line of coding

The coding line becomes:

    741, 321, 732

By putting 32 in the _C_ field, we cause the number in switch 741 to be
subtracted from whatever number is in register 321.

We have 2 more choices in adding and subtracting. The value of the
number without regard to sign—in other words, its _absolute value_ (see
Supplement 2)—may be added or subtracted. The instruction

    Add the absolute value of

is expressed by a _C_ field code 2, and the instruction

    Add the negative of the absolute value of

is expressed by a _C_ field code 1.


Multiplying

When we wish to multiply one number by another and get a product, we
have 3 numbers. We tell the machine about each of these numbers on
a separate line of coding. Multiplication is signaled by sending a
number into the _multiplicand counter_. The multiplicand counter has an
in-code 761. If the multiplicand is in 321, the instruction is:

    Take the number in 321; enter it as multiplicand; read the
    next coding line

The coding is:

    321, 761, 7

On the third following coding line, the multiplier is sent into
the _multiplier counter_. If the multiplier is in switch 741, the
instruction is:

Take the number in 741; enter it as multiplier; read the next coding
line

The coding is:

    741, ——, 7

We do not punch anything in the middle field: the machine is “educated”
and “knows” that it has started a multiplication and needs a
multiplier, and it expects this multiplier in the third coding line. To
have no code for the multiplier counter is, of course, a departure from
the general rule, but it saves some punching and permits the use of
this space for certain other codes, thus saving some operating time.

We need not confuse the 761 in-code for the multiplicand counter with
the 761 out-code, which happens to be the out-code of the 25th constant
register, because neither can occur in the other’s field. We may, of
course, use other registers besides 321 and 741 for supplying the
multiplicand and multiplier.

To get the product and put it into any storage counter _D_, we use two
lines of coding one right after the other:

     ——    ——   6421
    8761   _D_   ——

The _product counter_ has the out-code 8761. When the product is
desired, it is called for, transferred into counter _D_, and the
multiplication unit is automatically cleared. It takes time, however,
for the machine to perform a multiplication. That is the reason for
the preceding coding line and the 6421 in the _C_ field. While the
multiplication is going on, we can instruct the machine to do other
things that we want done. We can insert or _interpose_ coding lines in
between the multiplier line and the product line. For example, if we
have a multiplier of 10 digits, we can insert 8 coding lines and maybe
more. The 6421 code essentially tells the machine to finish both the
multiplication and the interposed instructions, and, as soon as the
later one of these two tasks is finished, to transfer out the product
to counter _D_.

Up to the middle of 1946, the wiring of the machine was a little
different and less convenient. When the product was obtained by the
multiplication unit, it had to be accepted and transferred at once into
one of the 72 storage registers.


Dividing

Division is called for by first sending the divisor into the _divisor
counter_, and this has a code 76 in the _B_ field. If the divisor is in
counter 321, the instruction may be:

    Take the number in 321; enter it as divisor; read the next
      coding line

The coding will then be:

    321, 76, 7

Three coding lines later, the dividend is called for, and the coding,
if the dividend is in switch 7431, is:

    7431, ——, 7

We can send the quotient, when ready, into any desired counter _Q_ by
the following two lines of coding:

    ——    ——   642
    876   _Q_   ——

In the same way as with multiplication, we can insert a number of
coding lines in between the dividend line and the first quotient line.

Both multiplication and division are carried out in the same unit of
the machine, the _multiply-divide unit_. The machine first constructs
a table of the multiples of the multiplicand or divisor: 1 times, 2
times, 3 times, ···, 9 times. In multiplication this table is then used
by selecting multiples according to the digits of the multiplier one
after another. In division the table is used by comparing multiples of
the divisor against the dividend and successive remainders, finding
which will go and which will not. Since the numbers in the machine are
normally of 15 to 23 digits, any particular multiple will be used,
on the average, several times, and so this process is relatively
efficient. Actually the multiplicand and the divisor go into the same
counter. Division, however, has the code 76 and multiplication the code
761, and so the difference is essentially an operation code not in the
third or _C_ field.


Consulting a Table

When we desire the machine to consult a table of values (i.e., a
_function_—see Supplement 2), we punch the table with its arguments and
function values on a tape, and we put the tape on a value tape feed
mechanism. The instruction to the machine may be:

    Take the number in register _A_; find the value of the
      function for this number, and enter it in register _B_.

The coding is:

    ——       ——       73
    _A_     7654      61
    ——       ——      762
    ——       ——      543
    ——       ——    75431
    841     7654     ——
    _A_      763    6421
    8762      _B_     73
    ——      8763       7

Without explaining this coding line by line, we can say that this is
what happens:

    The machine reads the argument in register _A_.
      The machine reads the argument in the table at which
      the value tape feed is resting.

    It subtracts them, and thereby determines how far away
      the desired argument is.

    The machine then turns the tape that required distance.

    It checks that the new argument is the wanted argument.

    It reads the value of the function entered at that
      point on the function tape.


Selecting

There is a storage counter in the machine that is called the _selection
counter_. The selection counter is counter 70 and has the code 732. It
has all the properties of an ordinary storage counter and, in addition,
one extra property: depending on the sign of the number stored in the
selection counter, it is possible to select whether some other number
shall be treated positively or negatively. In other words, addition of
a number anywhere in the machine may take place either positively or
negatively, if the number stored in the selection counter is positive
or negative, respectively.

For example, suppose that _x_ is the number in the selection counter.
Suppose that _y_ is the number in some other counter _A_. Suppose that
_z_ is the number in counter _B_. Suppose that we use the coding:

    _A_, _B_, 7432

What we get in _B_, because of the 7432 in the third or _C_ field, is
_z_ plus _y_ if _x_ is positive or zero, and _z_ minus _y_ if _x_ is
negative. In the language of the algebra of logic (see Chapter 9 and
Supplement 2), where _T_( ...) is “the truth value of ...,” the number
in _b_ equals:

    _z_ + _y_·_T_(_x_ ≥ 0) - _y_·_T_(_x_ < 0)

(The nines complement of 0, namely 999···9 to 24 digits, is treated by
the machine as negative.)

Why do we need an operation like this in a mechanical brain? Among
other reasons, what we want to do with a number, in mathematics, often
depends on its sign. It may happen that a table is, for negative
arguments, the negative of what it is for positive arguments; in
other words, _F_(-_x_) =-_F_(_x_). This is true, for instance, for a
table of _cubes_ {_F_(_x_) = _x_³} or for a table of _trigonometric
tangents_ (see Supplement 2). If so, we certainly do not want to take
the time and trouble to list the whole table. We put down only half
the table and then, if _x_ is negative, use the negative of the value
in the table. In order to apply such a time-saving rule when using the
machine, we need the selection counter or its equivalent.


Checking

There is another special counter in the machine that is called the
_check counter_. It also has all the properties of an ordinary storage
counter and, in addition, one extra property: If the sign of the number
stored in the check counter on a certain coding line is negative, then
on the next coding line the machine may be stopped. In other words,
suppose that the check counter stores a certain tolerance _t_. Suppose,
under the instructions we give the machine, that it calculates a
positive number _x_ that ought to be less than this tolerance. Suppose
that something may go wrong and that _x_ actually may be greater than
_t_. Then we put a check into our instructions. We tell the machine:

    When you have found _x_, subtract it from _t_.

    If the result is positive, go ahead.

    If the result is negative or zero, _stop_!

Here is the coding. Suppose that the tolerance _t_ is in switch 751.
Suppose that the number _x_ to be checked is in counter 4321. Then the
instructions and coding are:


    Clear the check counter                                   —    —    7
    Put in the tolerance, from switch 751                     751  74   7
    Subtract the absolute value of the number to be checked  4321  74  71
    Stop, O Mechanical Brain, if your result be negative!      —    —  64

An operation like this is very useful in a mechanical brain. It
enables the calculation to be interrupted if something has gone
wrong. Of course, other operations of checking besides this one are
used—for example, inspecting for reasonableness the results printed on
typewriter 1.


Other Operations

There are other operations in the machine. There are two pairs of
storage registers that can be _coupled_ together so that we can handle
problems requiring numbers of 46 digits instead of 23. Registers 64
and 65 can be coupled, and registers 68 and 69 can be coupled. There
is another storage counter, No. 71, that has an extra property. We can
read out the number it holds times 1, or times 10¹², or times 10⁻¹²,
as may be called for. As a result of this counter, we can do problems
requiring 144 registers storing numbers of 11 digits each, instead of
72 registers storing 23 digits each. Bigger statistical problems can be
handled, for example.

There are some minor sequences of operations, or _subroutines_, that
can be called for by a single code. The subroutine may be a whole set
of additions, subtractions, multiplications, divisions, and choices,
having a single purpose: to compute some number by a _process of rapid
approximation_ (see Supplement 2). There are built-in subroutines for
some special mathematical functions: the _logarithm_ of a number to the
base 10, the _exponential_ of a number to the base 10, and the _sine_
of a number. (See Supplement 2.)

There are also 10 changeable subroutines, each of 22 coding lines,
which can be called in, when wanted, by the main sequence-control tape
or by each other. These subroutines constitute the Subsidiary Sequence
Mechanism, and are extremely useful. They have _A_, _B_, and _C_ fields
just like the main sequence-control, but they are given information by
plugging with short lengths of wire instead of by feeding punched paper
tape.


RAPID APPROXIMATION FOR A LOGARITHM

Up to this point in this chapter the author has tried to tell the facts
about the Harvard machine in plain words. But for reading this section,
a little knowledge of calculus is necessary. (See also Supplement 2.)
If you wish, skip this section and go on to the next one.

What is the process that the machine uses to compute any desired
logarithm to 23 digits? Suppose that we take for an example the process
by which the machine computes log_{10} 49.3724. We choose a 6-digit
number for simplicity; the machine would handle a 23-digit number in
the same way. The process uses 2 fundamental equations involving the
logarithm: the sum relation

    log (_a_·_b_·_c_···) = log _a_ + log _b_ + log _c_···

and the series relation

                          _h_²   _h_³   _h_⁴
    logₑ(1 + _h_) = _h_ - ———— + ———— - ———— + ···, │_h_│ < 1
                           2      3      4

The error in this series is less than the first neglected term. Now,
the machine stores the base 10 logarithms (to 23 decimal places) of the
following 36 numbers:

     1   1.1  1.01  1.001
     2   1.2  1.02  1.002
    ...  ...   ...   ...
     9   1.9  1.09  1.009

First, the number 49.3724 is examined in a counter called the
_Logarithm-In-Out counter_, and the position of the decimal point is
determined, giving the _characteristic_ of the logarithm. The number
49.3724 has the characteristic 1. Next, 4 successive divisions are
performed, in which the 4 divisors are (1) the first digit of the
number, (2) the first 2 digits of the quotient, (3) the first 3 digits
of the next quotient, and (4) the first 4 digits of the subsequent
quotient; thus,

    4.93724/4 = 1.23431

    1.23431/1.2 = 1.02860

    1.02860/1.02 = 1.00843

    1.00843/1.008 = 1.00043

For simplicity we have kept only 6 digits, although the machine, of
course, would keep 23. It is interesting to note that the machine is
able to sense digits and thus determine the 4 divisors; this is an
arithmetical and numerical process and one that cannot be done in
ordinary algebra. We now have:

    log₁₀ 49.3724 = 1 + log₁₀ 4 + log₁₀ 1.2 + log₁₀ 1.02
                      + log₁₀ 1.008 + log₁₀ 1.00043

To compute log₁₀ 1.00043 to 21 decimals we use

               (      _h_²    _h_³     _h_⁴    _h_⁵   _h_⁶ )
    log₁₀_e_ · (_h_ - ————— + —————  - ———— + ————— - —————)
               (       2       3         4      5      6   )

with _h_ = 0.00043. Only 6 terms of the series relation are needed.
For, the error is less than _h_⁷/7, which is less than 10⁻²¹/7, since
_h_ < ¹/₁₀₀₀. The machine uses the series relation in the form

    log₁₀ (1 + _h_) = {([{(_c_₆_h_ + _c_₅)_h_ + _c_₄}_h_

                        + _c_₃]_h_ + _c_₂)_h_ + _c_₁}_h_
    where

    _c_₁ = _M_, _c_₂ = -_M_/2, _c_₃ = _M_/3, ···,

    and _M_ = log₁₀__e_= 0.434294···.

The 6 values of the _c_’s are also stored in the machine. When any
logarithm is to be computed, the sum of the characteristic, of the 4
logarithms of the successive divisors, and of the first 6 terms of the
series relation gives the logarithm. The maximum time required is 90
seconds.


AN APPRAISAL OF THE CALCULATOR

The IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator at Harvard is a
landmark in the development of machines that think. Its capacity for
many problems for which it is suited is far beyond the capacity of a
hundred human computers.


Speed

The time required in the machine for adding, subtracting, transferring,
or clearing numbers is ³/₁₀ of a second. This is the time of one
machine cycle or of reading one coding line. Multiplication takes at
the most 6 seconds, and an average of 4 seconds. Division takes at the
most 16 seconds, and an average of 11 seconds. Each, however, requires
only 3 lines of coding, or ⁹/₁₀ of a second’s attention from the
sequence mechanism; interposed operations fill the rest of the time.
To calculate a logarithm, an exponential, or a sine to the full number
of digits obtainable by means of the automatic subroutine takes at
the most 90, 66, and 60 seconds, respectively. To get three 24-digit
numbers from feeding a punch card takes ⅓ second. To punch a number
takes from ½ second up to 3 seconds. To print a number takes from 1½
seconds up to 7 seconds.


Cost and Value

The cost of the machine was somewhere near 3 or 4 hundred thousand
dollars, if we leave out some of the cost of research and development,
which would have been done whether or not this particular machine had
ever been built. A staff of 10 men, consisting of 4 mathematicians,
4 operators, and 2 maintenance men, are needed to keep the machine
running 24 hours a day. This might represent, if capitalized, another
1 or 2 hundred thousand dollars. If a capital value of $500,000 is
taken as equivalent to $50,000 a year, then the cost of the machine in
operation 24 hours a day is in the neighborhood of $150 a day or $6 an
hour.

The value of the machine, however, is very much greater. If 100 human
beings with desk calculators were set to work 8 hours a day at $1.50 an
hour, the cost would be $1200 a day, or 8 times as much. Yet it is very
doubtful that the work they could produce would equal that turned out
by the machine, either in quality or quantity, when the machine is well
suited to the problem.


Reliability

By reliability we mean the extent to which the results produced by the
machine can be relied on to be right. The machine contains no built-in
device for making its operations reliable. So, if we wish to check a
multiplication, for example, we can do the multiplication a second
time, interchanging the multiplier and the multiplicand. But if, say,
digit 16 of the product were not transferring correctly, we would get
the same wrong result both ways and we would not have a sufficient
check. Thus, when we set up a problem for the machine to do, one of the
big tasks we have is checking. We have to work out ways of making sure
that the result, when we get it, is right and ways of instructing the
machine to make the tests we want. This is not a new task. Whenever
you or I set out to solve a problem, we have to make sure—usually by
doing the problem twice, and preferably by doing it a different way the
second time—that our answer, when we get it, is correct. One of the
chief tasks for the mathematician, in making a sequence-control tape
for the machine, is to put into it sufficient checks to make sure that
the results are correct.

We can use a number of different kinds of partial checks: the check
counter; _differences_, and _smoothness_ (see Supplement 2); watching
the results printed on typewriter 1; mathematical checks; comparison
with known specific values; etc.

In actual experience on the machine, human failures, such as failure
to state the problem exactly or failure to put it on the machine
correctly, have given about as much trouble as mechanical failures. The
machine operates without mechanical failure about 90 to 95 per cent
of the time. The balance of the time the machine is idle while being
serviced or repaired. The machine is serviced by mechanics trained and
supervised at Harvard.

Often when we change the machine from one problem to another problem,
we find some kind of trouble. Consequently, we need to work out in
detail the first part of any calculation placed on the machine. We
then compare the results step by step with the results produced by the
machine. Any mathematician working with the machine needs considerable
training in order to diagnose trouble quickly and guide the maintenance
men to the place where repair or replacement is needed. Once you find
the trouble, you can fix it easily. Without disturbing the soldered
connections, you can easily pull out from its socket a relay that is
misbehaving and plug in a new relay. With a screwdriver you can change
a counter position—detach it from its socket and replace it by another
one that is working correctly.

One “bug” that will long be remembered around the Laboratory was a case
involving a 5 that would incorrectly come in to a number every now
and then. It did not happen often—only once in a while. After a week
of search the bug was finally located: the insulation on a wire that
carried a 5 had worn through in one spot, and once in a while this wire
would shake against a post that could carry current and took in the 5!


Efficiency

In many respects, this machine is efficient and well-balanced. Its
reading and writing speed is close to its calculating speed. We can
punch or print a result on the average for every 10 additions or 1½
multiplications. The memory of 72 numbers in the machine is extremely
useful; a smaller memory is a serious limitation on the achievements of
a computing machine. The machine can do many kinds of arithmetic and
logic. It is well educated and can compute automatically some rather
complicated mathematical functions, like logarithm or sine. It has done
difficult and important problems. It has computed and tabulated (see
Supplement 2) _Bessel functions_, _definite integrals_, etc. It can
solve _differential equations_ (see Chapter 5) and many other problems
in mathematics, physics, and engineering.

On the other hand, no calculator will ever again be built just like
this one, useful though it is. Electronic computing is easily 100 times
as fast as relay computing; nearly every future calculator will do
its computing electronically. Many other improvements will be made.
For example, in this calculator, there are 72 addition-subtraction
mechanisms, yet only one of these can be used at a time. Also, the
machine has only one combined multiply-divide unit. So we have to
organize any computation with few multiplications, and with still fewer
divisions, for they take longer still.

Until 1947, we had to organize any computation in this calculator into
one single fixed sequence of operations. In other words, there was
no way to move from one subroutine to another subroutine depending
on some indication that turned up in our computation. Recently, the
Harvard Computation Laboratory decided to remedy this condition and
provided the Subsidiary Sequence Mechanism equivalent to 10 subroutines
of 22 lines of coding each. These are on relays and plug wires and
may be called for by the sequence-control tape or by each other. This
provision has added greatly to the efficiency of the calculator.

Whatever else can be said about the Harvard IBM Automatic
Sequence-Controlled Calculator, it must be said that this was the first
general-purpose mechanical brain using numbers in digit form and able
to do arithmetic and logic in hundreds of thousands of steps one after
another. And great credit must go to Professor Howard H. Aiken of
Harvard and the men of International Business Machines Corporation who
made this great mechanical brain come into existence.




Chapter 7

SPEED—5000 ADDITIONS A SECOND:

MOORE SCHOOL’S ENIAC

(ELECTRONIC NUMERICAL INTEGRATOR AND CALCULATOR)


Another of the giant brains that has begun to work is named _ENIAC_.
This name comes from the initial letters of the full name, _Electronic
Numerical Integrator and Calculator_. Eniac was born in 1942 at
the Moore School of Electrical Engineering, of the University of
Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia. Eniac’s father was the Ordnance
Department of the U. S. Army, which provided the funds to feed and rear
the prodigy.

In the short space of four years, Eniac grew to maturity, and in
February 1946 he began to earn his own living by electronic thinking.
Eniac promptly set several world’s records. He was the first giant
brain to use electronic tubes for calculating. He was the first one to
reach the speed of 5000 additions a second. He was the first piece of
electronic apparatus containing as many as 18,000 electronic tubes all
functioning together successfully. As soon as Eniac started thinking,
he promptly made relay calculators obsolete from the scientific point
of view, for they have a top speed of perhaps 10 additions a second.

At the age of 5, he moved to Maryland at a cost of about $90,000, and
his permanent home is now the Ballistic Research Laboratories at the U.
S. Army’s Proving Ground at Aberdeen, Md.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT

In the Department of Terrestrial Magnetism in the Carnegie Institution
of Washington, a great deal of information about the earth is studied.
Many kinds of physical observations are there gathered and analyzed:
electricity in the atmosphere, magnetism in the earth, and the weather,
for example. In 1941, a physicist, Dr. John W. Mauchly, was thinking
about the great mass of numerical information they had to handle. He
became convinced that much swifter ways of handling these numbers were
needed. He was certain electronic devices could be used for computing
at very high speeds, yet he found no one busy applying electronics in
this field. With hopes of finding some way of developing electronic
computing, he joined the staff of the Moore School of Electrical
Engineering in the autumn of 1941.

The Moore School in 1934 and 1935 had built a differential analyzer;
and, from that time on, the school had made a number of improvements
in it. In 1941, with war imminent, the differential analyzer was put
hard at work calculating tables for the Army’s Ballistic Research
Laboratories. These tables were mostly firing tables, tables of the
paths along which projectiles travel when fired—_trajectories_;
obviously, you cannot fire a gun usefully, unless you know how to aim
it. The amount of calculation of trajectories was so huge that Dr.
Mauchly suggested that a machine using electronic tubes be constructed
to calculate them. A good deal of discussion took place between men at
the Moore School, men at the Ballistic Research Laboratories, and men
from the Ordnance Department in Washington. A contract for research
into an electronic trajectory computer was concluded with the Ordnance
Department of the U. S. Army. Mauchly and one of the young electronics
engineers studying at Moore School, J. Presper Eckert, Jr., set to work
on the design.

Gradually the design of a machine took form, and the crucial
experiments on equipment were completed. In 1943, the design was
settled as a special-purpose machine to calculate trajectories. Later
on, the group modified the plans here and there to enable the machine
to calculate a very wide class of problems. A group of Moore School
electronics engineers and technicians during 1944 and 1945 built the
machine, using as much as possible standard radio tubes and parts.
Here, again, in spite of the successful progress of the electronic
machine, the rumor that it was a “white elephant” was allowed to spread
in order to protect the work from prying enemy ears.


GENERAL ORGANIZATION

The main part of Eniac consists of 42 _panels_, which are placed along
the sides of a square U. Each of these panels is 9 feet high, 2 feet
wide, and 1 foot thick. They are of sheet steel, painted black, with
switches, lights, etc., mounted on them. At the tops of all the panels
are air ducts for drawing off the hot air around the tubes. Large
motors and fans above the machine suck the heated air away through the
ducts. There are also 5 pieces of equipment which can be rolled from
place to place and are called _portable_, but there is no choice as to
where they can be plugged in. We shall call this equipment panels 43 to
47.


Panels

Now what are these panels, and what do they do? Each panel is an
assembly of some equipment. The names of the panels are shown in the
accompanying table. The arrangement of Eniac at the Ballistic Research
Laboratories as shown in the table is slightly different from the
arrangement of Eniac at Moore School.

NAMES OF PANELS OF ENIAC

     PANEL NO.  NAME (AND ADDITIONAL NAMES IN SOME CASES)

         1       Initiating Unit
         2       Cycling Unit
      3, 4       Master Programmer, panels 1, 2
         5       Accumulator 1
         6       Accumulator 2
         7       Accumulator 3
         8       Accumulator 4 (Quotient)
         9       Divider-Square-Rooter
        10       Accumulator 5 (Numerator I)
        11       Accumulator 6 (Numerator II)
        12       Accumulator 7 (Denominator—Square Root I)
        13       Accumulator 8 (Denominator—Square Root II)
        14       Accumulator 9 (Shift I)
        15       Accumulator 10 (Shift II)
        16       Blank panel for new unit (Converter)
        17       Accumulator 11 (Multiplier)
        18       Accumulator 12 (Multiplicand)
     19-21       Multiplier, panels 1, 2, 3
        22       Accumulator 13 (Left-Hand Partial Products I)
        23       Accumulator 14 (Left-Hand Partial Products II)
        24         Accumulator 15 (Right-Hand Products I)
        25         Accumulator 16 (Right-Hand Products II)
        26         Blank panel for new unit (100 Registers)
        27         Accumulator 17
        28         Accumulator 18
        29         Accumulator 19
        30         Accumulator 20
    31, 32     Function Table 1, panels 1, 2
    33, 34     Function Table 2, panels 1, 2
    35, 36     Function Table 3, panels 1, 2
     37-39      Constant Transmitter, panels 1, 2, 3
     40-42      Printer, panels 1, 2, 3
     43-45      Portable Function Tables _A_, _B_, and _C_
        46         IBM Card Reader
        47         IBM Summary Punch

     _Note_: The accumulators from which a number can be sent
                  to the printer are now accumulators 1, 2, and
                  15 to 20.

In reading over the table, we find a number of words that need
explaining. Some of the explanation we can give in the summary of the
units of Eniac:

SUMMARY OF UNITS OF ENIAC

    QUANTITY       DEVICE                        SIGNIFICANCE

    20  Accumulators           Store, add, and subtract numbers
    1   Multiplier             Multiplies
    1   Divider-Square-Rooter  Divides, and obtains twice the _square
                                 root_ of a number (see Supplement 2)
    3   Function Tables        Part of the memory, for referring to
                                 tables of numbers
    1   Constant Transmitter   Stores numbers from the card reader and
                                 from hand-set switches
    1   Printer                Punches machine results into cards
    1   Cycling Unit           Controls the timing of the various parts
                                 of the machine
    1   Initiating Unit        Has controls for starting a calculation,
                                 for clearing, etc.
    1   Master Programmer      Holds the chief controls for coordinating
                                  the various parts of the machine

An _accumulator_ is a storage counter. It can hold a number; it
can clear a number; it can transmit a number either positively or
negatively; and it can receive a number by adding the number in and
thus holding the sum of what it held before and the number received.
Eniac when first built had only 20 accumulators, and so it could
remember only 20 numbers at one time (except for constant numbers set
in switches). This small memory was the most serious drawback of Eniac;
panel 26 was designed, therefore, to provide a great additional memory
capacity.

The _divider-square-rooter_, as its name tells, is a mechanism that
can divide and that can find twice the square root of a number. Eniac
is one of the several giant brains that have had square root capacity
built into them, particularly since square root is needed for solving
trajectories.

Many panels of Eniac have double duty and some have triple duty.
For example, panel 24 is an accumulator, but it also (1) stores the
right-hand partial products (see Supplement 2) of the multiplier
and (2) was a register, when Eniac was at Moore School, from which
information to be punched in the printer could be obtained. Clearly, if
we have a multiplication to do, we cannot also use this accumulator for
storing a number that is to remain unchanged during the multiplication.


Parts

The total number of parts in Eniac is near half a million, even if
we count electronic tubes as single parts. There are over 18,800
electronic tubes in the machine. It is interesting to note that only 10
kinds of electronic tubes are used in the calculating circuits and only
about 60 kinds of _resistors_ and 30 kinds of _capacitors_. A resistor
is a device that opposes the steady flow of electric current through
it to a certain extent (called _resistance_ and measured in _ohms_). A
capacitor is a device that can store electrical energy up to a certain
extent (called _capacitance_ and measured in _farads_). All these tubes
and parts are standard parts in radios. All types are identified by the
color labels established in standard radio manufacturing. It is the
combinations of these parts, like the combinations of pieces in a chess
game, that give rise to the marvelous powers of Eniac.

The combinations of parts at the first level are called _plug-in
units_. A plug-in unit is a standard box or tray or chassis made
of sheet steel containing a standard assembly of tubes, wires, and
other parts. It can be pushed in or pulled out of a standard socket
with many connections. An example of a plug-in unit is a _decade_,
or, more exactly, an _accumulator decade_. This is just a counter
wheel or decimal position expressed in Eniac language: it can express
successively all the digits from 0 to 9 and then pass from 9 to 0,
giving rise to a carry impulse. It is striking that a mechanical
counter to hold 10 digits can be made up of 10 little wheels, ¼ inch
wide and an inch high. But an accumulator in Eniac, to hold 10 digits,
is a set of 10 decades each 2 inches wide and 2½ feet high.

There are only about 20 kinds of plug-in units altogether. Each plug-in
unit is interchangeable with any other of the same kind. So, if a
decade, for example, shows trouble, you can pull it out of its socket
and plug in a spare decade instead.


Numbers

Numbers in Eniac are of 10 decimal digits with a sign that may be plus
or minus. The decimal point is fixed. However, when you are connecting
one accumulator with another, you can shift the decimal point if you
want to. Also, 2 accumulators may be coupled together so as to handle
numbers of 20 digits.


HOW INFORMATION GOES INTO THE MACHINE

There are three ways by which information—numbers or instructions—can
go into the Eniac. Numbers can be put into the machine by means of
punch cards fed into the Card Reader, panel 46, or switches on the
Constant Transmitter, panels 37 to 39. Numbers or instructions can
also go into the machine by means of the Function Tables, panels 43 to
45. Here there are dial switches, which are set by hand. Instructions
can also go into the machine by setting the switches, plugging the
inputs and outputs, etc., of the wires or lines along which numbers and
instructions travel.


HOW INFORMATION COMES OUT OF THE MACHINE

There are two ways by which numerical information can come out of
the machine. Numbers can come out of the machine punched on cards by
the Summary Punch, panel 47. They are then printed in another room by
means of a separate IBM tabulator. Also, numbers can be read out of
the machine by means of the lights in the _neon bulbs_ mounted on each
accumulator. You can read in the lights of a panel the number held by
the accumulator, if the panel is not computing.


HOW INFORMATION IS MANIPULATED IN THE MACHINE

Eniac handles information rather differently from any other of the big
brains. Instead of having only one bus or “railroad line” along which
numbers can be sent, Eniac has more than 10 such lines. They are called
_digit trays_ and labeled A, B, C, ···. Each contains 11 _digit trunk
lines_ or _digit trunks_—10 to carry the digits of a number, and the
11th to carry the sign. Instead of having only one telegraph line along
which instructions can be sent, Eniac has more than 100 such lines.
They are called _program trunk lines_ or _program trunks_ and labeled
A1, A2, ···, A11, B1, B2, ···, B11, ···, etc. They are assembled in
groups of 11 to a tray; the _program trays_, in fact, look just like
the digit trays, except for their connectors and their purpose, which
are different. Below, we shall make clear how the program trays carry
control information.

Now, actually, Eniac has many more trunk lines than we have just
stated, for each of the lines we have mentioned can be divided into
numerous separate sections by the removal of plug connections. How
we choose to do this depends on the needs of the problem, the space
between the panels, the time when the line is used, etc.


Transferring Numbers, Adding, and Subtracting

Basically, a number is represented in Eniac by an arrangement of on
and off electronic tube elements in pairs, called _flip-flops_. There
is one flip-flop enclosed in a single tube (type 6SN7) for each value
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 for each of the 10 digits stored in an
accumulator. So we have at least 100 flip-flops for each accumulator,
and thus at least 100 electronic tubes are required to store 10 digits.
Actually, an accumulator needs 550 electronic tubes. So we see that
there is not very much of a future in this type of arrangement. The
newer electronic brains use different devices for storage of numbers.

In order to show what number is stored in an accumulator, there are 100
little neon bulbs mounted on the face of each accumulator panel. Each
bulb glows when the flip-flop that belongs to it is on. For example,
suppose that the 4th decade in Accumulator 11 holds the digit 7. Then
the 7th flip-flop in that decade will be on, and all the others will be
off. The 7th neon bulb for that decade will glow.

Now suppose that the number 7 is in the 4th decade in Accumulator 11
and is to be added into, say, the 4th decade in Accumulator 13. And
suppose that it is to be subtracted from the 4th decade in Accumulator
16. What do we do, and what will Eniac do?

First, we pick out 2 digit trays, say B and D. Accumulator 11 has 2
outputs, called the _add output_ and the _subtract output_. We plug B
into the add output and D into the subtract output. Then we go over to
Accumulators 13 and 16. They have 5 inputs, that is, 5 ways of being
plugged to receive numbers from digit trunks. These inputs are named
with _Greek letters_, α, β, γ, δ, ε. We choose one input, say γ, for
Accumulator 13, and we plug B into that input. We choose one input, say
ε, for Accumulator 16, and we plug D into that input.

Now we have the “railroad” switching for numbers accomplished. We
have set up a channel whereby the number in Accumulator 11 will be
routed positively into Accumulator 13 and negatively into Accumulator
16. Now let us suppose that, at some definite time fixed by the
control, Accumulator 11 is stimulated to transmit and Accumulators
13 and 16 are conditioned to receive. When this happens, a group of
10 _pulses_ comes along a direct trunk from the cycling unit, and a
group of 9 pulses comes along another trunk. We can think of each
pulse as a little surge of electricity lasting about 2 millionths
of a second. The _ten-pulses_, as the first group is called, are 10
millionths of a second apart. The _nine-pulses_, as the second group
is called, are also 10 millionths of a second apart but are sandwiched
between the ten-pulses. When the 1st ten-pulse comes along, the 7th
flip-flop in Accumulator 11 goes off, the 8th flip-flop goes on, the
following nine-pulse goes through and goes out on the subtract line to
Accumulator 16. Then the 2nd ten-pulse comes along, the 8th flip-flop
goes off, the 9th flip-flop goes on, and the next nine-pulse goes out
on the subtract line to Accumulator 16. Now the decade sits at 9,
and for this reason the next ten-pulse changes an electronic switch
(actually another flip-flop) so that all later nine-pulses will go
out on the add line. This ten-pulse also turns off the 9th flip-flop
and turns on the 0th flip-flop without causing any carry. Now the 4th
of the ten-pulses comes along, turns the 0th flip-flop off, and turns
the 1st flip-flop on, and the next nine-pulse goes out on the add line
to Accumulator 13. The next 6 of the ten-pulses then come along and
change Accumulator 11 back to the digit 7 as before, and the next 6
of the nine-pulses go out to Accumulator 13. Thus Eniac has added 7
into Accumulator 13, has added 2, the _nines complement_ of 7 (see
Supplement 2), into Accumulator 16, and has left Accumulator 11 holding
the same number as before. This is just the result that we wanted.

In this way, the nines complement of any digit in a decade is
transferred out along the subtract line, and the digit unchanged is
transmitted out along the add line. As the pulses arrive at any other
accumulator, they add into that accumulator.


Multiplying and Dividing

Eniac performs multiplication by a built-in table of the products in
the 10-by-10 multiplication table, using the method of _left-hand
components_ and _right-hand components_ (see Supplement 2). For
example, suppose that the 3rd digit of the multiplier is 7 and that the
5th digit of the multiplicand is 6. Then, when Eniac attends to the
3rd digit of the multiplier, the right-hand digit of the 42 = 6 × 7 is
gathered in one accumulator, and the left-hand digit 4 is gathered in
another accumulator. After Eniac has attended to all the digits of the
multiplier, then Eniac performs one more addition and transfers the sum
of the left-hand digits into the right-hand digits accumulator.

Eniac does division in rather a novel way. First, the divisor is
subtracted over and over until the result becomes negative or 0. Then
the machine shifts to the next column and adds the divisor until the
result becomes positive or 0. It continues this process, alternating
from column to column. For example, suppose that we divide 3 into 84 in
this way. We have:

      ______  _
    3 ) 84 ( 32
       -3
       ——
       +54
       -3
       ——
       +24
       -3
       ——
        -6
        +3
        ——
        -3
        +3
        ——
         0

After we subtract 3 the third time, the result becomes negative,-6;
in the next column, after we add 3 twice, the result becomes 0. The
quotient is

     _
    32, which is the same as 30 - 2, or 28;

and 3 × 28 is 84. Thus the process checks.


Consulting a Table

Eniac has three Function Tables. Here you can store numbers or
instructions for the machine to refer to. Each Function Table has
104 _arguments_ (see Supplement 2). For each argument, you can store
12 digits and 2 signs that may be plus or minus. This capacity can
be devoted to one 12-digit number with a sign, or to two 6-digit
numbers each with a sign, or to six 2-digit instructions. The three
Function Tables are panels 43, 44, and 45. To put in the numbers or
instructions, you have to go over to these panels and set the numbers
or instructions, digit by digit, turning dial switches by hand. It is
slow and hard to do this right, but once it is done, Eniac can refer
to any number or instruction in any table in ¹/₁₀₀₀ of a second. This
is much faster than the table reference time in any other of the giant
brains built up to 1948.


Programming

We said above that Eniac has over 100 control lines or program trunks
along which instructions can be sent. These instructions are expressed
as pulses called _program pulses_. Now how do we make these pulses do
what we want them to do? For example, how can we instruct Accumulator
11 to add what it holds into Accumulator 13?

On each unit of Eniac there are plug hubs or sockets (called
_program-pulse input terminals_) to which a program trunk may be
connected. A program pulse received here can make the unit act in some
desired way. On each accumulator of Eniac, we find 12 program-pulse
input hubs. Corresponding to each of these hubs, there is a nine-way
switch, called a _program-control switch_. The setting of this switch
determines what the accumulator will do when the program-pulse input
hub belonging to the switch receives a program pulse. For instance,
there are switch settings for: receive input on the α line, receive
input on the β line, etc.; and transmit output on the add line, etc.
There is even a switch setting that instructs the accumulator to do
nothing, and this instruction may be both useful and important.

Now, in order that Accumulator 11 may transfer a number to Accumulator
13, we need: (1) a digit tray, say B, for the number to travel along;
(2) a program trunk line, say G3, to tell Accumulator 11 when to send
the number and Accumulator 13 when to receive it; and (3) certain
plugging as follows:

    1. We plug from program trunk G3 into a program-pulse
       input hub, say No. 5, of Accumulator 11;

    2. We plug from the same program trunk G3 into a
       program-pulse input hub, say No. 7, of Accumulator 13;

    3. We set program-control switch No. 5 of Accumulator
       11 to “add”;

    4. We set program-control switch No. 7 of Accumulator
       13 to some input, say γ.

    5. We plug from digit tray B into the add output of
       Accumulator 11.

    6. We plug from digit tray B into the γ input of
       Accumulator 13.

Now, when the program pulse comes along line G3, it makes Accumulator
13 transmit additively along digit tray B into Accumulator 13. And that
is the result that we wanted.

As each mechanism of Eniac finishes what it is instructed to do, it
may or may not put out a program pulse. This pulse in turn may be
plugged into any other program trunk line and may stimulate another
mechanism to act. Then, when this mechanism finishes, it too may or may
not put out a program pulse, and so on.

In general, there are two different ways to instruct Eniac to do a
problem. One way is to set all the switches, plug all the connections,
etc., for the specific problem. This is a long and hard task. Very
often, even with great care, it is done not quite correctly, and
then the settings must be carefully checked all over again. A second
method (called the _von Neumann programming method_) is to store all
the instructions for a problem in one or two function tables of Eniac
and then tell Eniac to read the function tables in sequence and to do
what they say. The rest of the machine is then wired up in a standard
fashion. This method of instructing Eniac was proposed by Dr. John von
Neumann of the Institute of Advanced Study at Princeton, N. J. Eniac
has been modified to the slight extent needed so that this method can
be used when desired. In this method, each instruction is a selected
one of 60 different standard instructions or orders—one of them, for
example, being “multiplication.” Each standard order is expressed by
2 decimal digits. The 60 standard orders are sufficient so that Eniac
can do any mathematical problem that does not overstrain its capacity.
Since each of the 3 Function Tables can hold 600 2-digit instructions,
the machine can hold a program of 1800 instructions under the von
Neumann programming method.


AN APPRAISAL OF ENIAC AS A COMPUTER

As a general-purpose calculating machine, Eniac suffers from unbalance.
That is to say, Eniac operates rapidly and successfully in some
respects, and slowly and troublesomely in other respects. This is
altogether to be expected, however, in a calculator as novel as Eniac
and made to so large an extent out of standard radio parts. It was
certainly better to finish a calculator like this one and then start
on a new one, as the Moore School of Electrical Engineering did, than
to prolong design and construction indefinitely in order to make
improvements.


Speed

Eniac adds or subtracts very swiftly at the rate of 5000 a second.
Eniac multiplies at the rate of 360 to 500 a second. Division,
however, is slow, relatively; the rate is about 50 a second. Reading
numbers from punched cards, 12 a second for 10-digit numbers, is even
slower. As a result of these rates, you find, when you put a problem
on Eniac, that one division delays you as long as 100 additions or
8 multiplications. Division might have been speeded somewhat by
(1) _rapidly convergent approximation_ (see Supplement 2) to the
_reciprocal_ of the divisor and (2) multiplying by the dividend; this
might have taken 5 or 6 multiplication times instead of 8. Also, the
use of a standard IBM punch-card feed and card punch slows the machine
greatly. One way to overcome this drawback might be to install one or
two additional sets of such equipment, which might increase input and
output speed.


Ease of Programming

Eniac has a very rapid and flexible automatic control over the
programming of operations. Eniac has more than 10 channels along which
numbers can be transferred and more than 100 channels along which
program-control pulses can be transferred. There are many ways for
providing subroutines. Eniac has the additional advantage that there
is no delay in giving the machine successive instructions: all the
instructions the machine may need at any time are ready at the start of
the problem, and indications occurring in the calculation can change
the routine completely.

All these advantages, however, are paid for rather heavily by the
slow methods for changing programming. You have to plug large numbers
of program trunk lines and digit trunk lines, or you have to set
large numbers of switches, or both. Also, when you wish to return to
a previous problem, you must do all the plugging and switch setting
over again. Many delays in the operation of the machine are due to
human errors in setting the machine for a new problem. Here again, we
must remember that Eniac was originally designed as a special-purpose
machine for solving trajectories. To calculate a large family of
trajectories very little changing of wires and switches would be
needed.


Memory

The most severe limitation on the usefulness of Eniac was, at the
outset, the fact that it had only 20 registers for storing numbers.
There are large numbers of problems that cannot be simply handled with
so small an internal memory. Even the Harvard IBM calculator (see
Chapter 6) is often strained during a problem because of the number of
intermediate results that must be stored for a time before combining.
The Ballistic Research Laboratories, however, contracted for extensions
to Eniac to provide more memory and easier changing of instructions.


Reliability

Checking results with Eniac is not easy. There is no built-in guarantee
that Eniac’s results are correct. A large calculator can and does make
both constant and intermittent errors. Ways for checking with Eniac are:

    Mathematical, if and when available, and this will be
      seldom.

    Running the problem a second time, and this will, at
      most, prove consistency.

    Deliberate testing of small parts of the problem,
      which is very useful and is standard practice but
      leads only to a probability that the final result is
      correct.

You can operate Eniac one addition at a time, and even one pulse at a
time, and see what the machine shows in its little neon bulbs. This is
a very useful partial check.


Cost

The cost of Eniac is higher than that of some of the other large
mechanical brains—over half a million dollars. Because some of the
work was done at the Moore School by students, the cost was probably
less than it otherwise would have been. The largest part of the cost
was the designing of the machine and the construction of the panels;
the tubes were only a small portion of the cost. The tubes used in
the calculating circuits cost only 20 to 90 cents. However, no later
electronic calculator need cost as much, for many improvements can now
be seen.

The power required for Eniac is about 150 kilowatts or about 200
horsepower, most of which is used for the heaters of the electronic
tubes. The largest number of electronic tubes mentioned for future
electronic calculators is about 3000, so we can see that they are
likely to use less than a quarter of the power needed for Eniac.

Eniac will doubtless give a number of years of successful operation
and be extremely useful for problems that employ its assets and are
not excluded by its limitations. In fact, at the Ballistic Research
Laboratories, for a typical week of actual work, Eniac has already
proved to be equal to 500 human computers working 40 hours with desk
calculating machines, and it appears that soon two or three times as
much work may be obtained from Eniac.




Chapter 8

RELIABILITY—NO WRONG RESULTS:

BELL LABORATORIES’ GENERAL-PURPOSE RELAY CALCULATOR


In 1946, Bell Telephone Laboratories in New York finished two
_general-purpose relay calculators_—mechanical brains. They were twins.
One was shipped in July 1946 to the National Advisory Committee for
Aeronautics at Langley Field, Virginia. The other, after some months of
trial operation, was shipped in February 1947 to the Ballistic Research
Laboratories at the U. S. Army’s Proving Ground, Aberdeen, Md.

Each machine is remarkably reliable and versatile. It can do a wide
variety of calculations in a great many different ways. Yet the machine
never takes a new step without a check that the old step was correctly
performed. There is, therefore, a chance of better than 99.999,999,999
per cent that the machine will not let a wrong result come out. The
automatic checking, of course, does not prevent (1) human mistakes—for
example, instructing the machine incorrectly—or (2) mechanical
failures, in which the machine stops dead in its tracks, letting no
result at all come out.


ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT

In Bell Telephone Laboratories the telephone system of the country is
continually studied. Their research produced the common type of dial
telephone system: a masterly machine for selecting information.

Now when a telephone engineer studies an electric circuit, he often
finds it very convenient to use numbers in pairs: like 2, 5 or-4,-1.
Here the comma is a separation sign to keep the two numbers in the pair
separate and in sequence. Mathematicians call numbers of this kind, for
no very good reason, _complex numbers_; of course, they are far less
complex than why the sun shines or why plants grow.

When Bell Laboratories test the design of new circuits, girl computers
do arithmetic with complex numbers. Addition and subtraction are
easy: each means two operations of addition or subtraction of
ordinary numbers. For example, 2, 5, plus-4,-1 equals 2-4, 5-1, which
equals-2, 4. And 2, 5 minus-4,-1 is the same as 2, 5 plus 4, 1; and
this equals 2 + 4, 5 + 1, which equals 6, 6. Multiplication of two
complex numbers, however, is more work. If _a_, _b_ and _c_, _d_ are
two complex numbers, then the formula for their product is (_a_ ×
_c_)-(_b_ × _d_), (_a_ × _d_) + (_b_ × _c_). To get the answer, we
need 4 multiplications, 1 subtraction, and 1 addition. Division of two
complex numbers requires even more work. If _a_, _b_ and _c_, _d_ are
two complex numbers, the formula for the quotient of _a_, _b_ divided
by _c_, _d_ is:

    [(_a_ × _c_) + (_b_ × _d_)] ÷ [(_c_ × _c_) + (_d_ × _d_)],

    [(_b_ × _c_) - (_a_ × _d_)] ÷ [(_c_ × _c_) + (_d_ × _d_)]

For example,

    (2, 5) ÷ (-4, -1) = [(2 × -4 = -8) + (5 × -1 = -5)]
           ÷ [(-4 × -4 = 16) + (-1 × -1 = 1)],

    [(5 × -4 = -20) - (2 × -1 = -2)] ÷ [16 + 1] = -(¹³/₁₇), -(¹⁸/₁₇)

Thus, division of one complex number by another needs 6
multiplications, 2 additions, 1 subtraction, and 2 divisions of
ordinary numbers—and always in the same pattern or sequence.


The Complex Computer

About 1939, an engineer at Bell Telephone Laboratories in New York, Dr.
George R. Stibitz, noticed the great volume of this pattern arithmetic.
He began to wonder why telephone switching equipment could not be used
to do the multiplications and divisions automatically. He decided it
could. All that was necessary was that the _relays_ (see Chapter 2)
used in regular telephone equipment should have a way of remembering
and calculating with numbers. Regular telephone equipment would take
care of the proper sequence of operations. Regular equipment known as
_teletypewriters_ would print the numbers of the answer when it was
obtained. A teletypewriter consists essentially of a typewriter that
may be operated by electrical impulses. It has a keyboard that may
produce electrical impulses in sets corresponding to letters; and it
can receive or transmit over wires.

Dr. Stibitz _coded_ the numbers: each decimal digit was matched up with
a group of four relays in sequence, and each of these relays could be
open or closed. If 0 means open and 1 means closed, here is the pattern
or code that he used:

    DECIMAL DIGIT   RELAY CODE
          0          0 0 1 1
          1          0 1 0 0
          2          0 1 0 1
          3          0 1 1 0
          4          0 1 1 1

          5          1 0 0 0
          6          1 0 0 1
          7          1 0 1 0
          8          1 0 1 1
          9          1 1 0 0

With regular telephone relays and regular telephone company techniques,
Dr. Stibitz and Bell Telephone Laboratories designed and constructed
the machine. It was called the _Complex Computer_ and was built just
for multiplying and dividing complex numbers. Six or eight panels of
relays and wires were in one room. Two floors away, some of the girl
computers sat in another room, where one of the teletypewriters of
the machine was located. When they wished, they could type into the
machine’s teletypewriter the numbers to be multiplied or divided. In a
few seconds back would come the answer. In fact, there were two more
computing rooms where teletypewriters of the machine were stationed. To
prevent conflicts between stations, the machine had a circuit like the
busy signal from a telephone.

In 1940, a demonstration of the Complex Computer took place: the
computing panels remained in New York, but the teletypewriter
input-output station was set up at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N. H.
Mathematicians gave problems to the machine in Dartmouth, it solved
them in New York, and it reported the answers in Dartmouth.


Special-Purpose Computers

With this as a beginning, Bell Laboratories developed another machine
for a wide variety of mathematical processes called _interpolating_
(see Supplement 2). Then, during World War II, Bell Laboratories made
more special-purpose computing machines. They were used in military
laboratories charged with testing the accuracy of instruments for
controlling the fire of guns. These computers took in a set of
gun-aiming directions put out by the _fire-control instrument_ in
some test. They also took in the set of observations that went into
the fire-control instrument on that test. Then they computed the
differences between the gun-aiming produced by the fire-control
instrument and the gun-aiming really required by the observations.
Using these differences, the fire-control instrument could be adjusted
and corrected. These special-purpose computers were also useful in
checking the design of new fire-control instruments and in checking
changes due to new types of guns or explosives.

Regularly, after each of these special-purpose computers was finished,
people began to put other problems on it. It seemed to be fated that,
as soon as you had made a machine for one purpose, you wanted to use
it for something else. Accordingly, in 1944, two agencies of the U. S.
Government together made a contract with Bell Telephone Laboratories
for two general-purpose relay computers. These two machines were
finished in 1946 and are twins.


ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL-PURPOSE COMPUTER

When a man sits down at a desk to work on a computation, he has six
things on his desk to work with: a work sheet; a desk calculator, to
add, subtract, multiply, and divide; some rules to be followed; the
tables of numbers he will need; the data for the problem; and an answer
sheet. In his head, he has the capacity to make decisions and to do
his work in a certain sequence of steps. These seven subdivisions of
calculation are all found in the Bell Laboratories’ general-purpose
relay computer. The general-purpose computer is a computing system, in
fact, more than it is a single machine. The part of the system which
does the actual calculating is called, in the following paragraphs,
the _computer_, or else, since it is in two halves, _Computer 1_ and
_Computer 2_.


Physical Units

The computing system delivered to the Ballistic Research Laboratories
fills a room about 30 by 40 feet and consists of the following:

    2 _computers_: panels of relays, wiring, etc.,
      which add, subtract, multiply, divide, select,
      decide, control, etc.

    4 _problem positions_: tables each holding 12
      mechanisms for feeding paper tape, which read numbers
      and instructions punched on tape and convert them
      into electrical impulses.

    2 _hand perforators_: keyboard devices for
      punching instructions and numbers on paper tape.

    1 _processor_: a table holding mechanisms for
      feeding 2 paper tapes and punching a third paper
      tape, used for checking numbers and instructions
      punched on tape.

    2 _recorders_: each a table holding a
      teletypewriter, a tape punch, and a tape feed, used
      for recording answers and, if necessary, consulting
      them again.

The 2 computers correspond to the work sheet, the desk calculator,
and the man’s capacity to make decisions and to carry out a sequence
of steps. The 4 problem positions correspond to the problem data, the
rules, and the tables of numbers. The 2 recorders correspond to the
answer sheet. The 2 hand perforators and the processor are auxiliary
machines: they translate the ordinary language of arithmetic into the
machine language of punched holes in paper tape.

This is the computing system as organized for the Ballistic Research
Laboratories at Aberdeen. The one for the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics has only 3 problem positions. The computer system may,
in fact, be organized with 1 to 10 computers and with 1 to 20 problem
positions.

The great bulk of this computing system, like the mechanical brains
described in previous chapters, is made up of large numbers of
identical parts of only a few kinds. These are: standard telephone
relays; wire; and standard _teletype transmitters_, mechanisms that
read punched paper tape and produce electrical impulses.


Numbers

The numbers that the Bell machine contains range from 0.1000000 to
0.9999999 times a _power_ of 10 varying from 10,000,000,000,000,000,000
to 0.000,000,000,000,000,000,1, or, in other words, from 10¹⁹ to 10⁻¹⁹.
The machine also contains zero and _infinity_: zero arises when the
number is smaller than 10⁻¹⁹, and infinity arises when the number is
equal to or greater than 9,999,999,000,000,000,000. (See Supplement 2.)

The system used in the machine to represent numbers on relays is called
_biquinary_—the _bi_-, because it is partly twofold like the hands, and
the -_quinary_ because it is partly fivefold like the fingers. This
system is used in the abacus (see Chapter 2 and Supplement 2). In the
machine, for each decimal digit, 7 relays are used. These relays are
called the 00 and 5 relays, and the 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 relays. If, as
before, 0 indicates a relay that is not energized and 1 indicates a
relay that is energized, then each decimal digit is represented by the
positioning of the 7 relays as follows:

    DECIMAL DIGIT        RELAYS

                    00 5   0 1 2 3 4

          0          1 0   1 0 0 0 0
          1          1 0   0 1 0 0 0
          2          1 0   0 0 1 0 0
          3          1 0   0 0 0 1 0
          4          1 0   0 0 0 0 1

          5          0 1   1 0 0 0 0
          6          0 1   0 1 0 0 0
          7          0 1   0 0 1 0 0
          8          0 1   0 0 0 1 0
          9          0 1   0 0 0 0 1

Then, for any decimal digit, one and only one of the 00 and 5 relays
is energized, and one and only one of the 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 relays
is energized. If more or less than exactly one relay in each set is
energized, then the machine knows that it has made a mistake, and it
stops dead in its tracks. Thus any accidental failure of a relay is at
once caught, and the chance of two compensating failures occurring at
the same time is extremely small.


HOW INFORMATION GOES INTO THE MACHINE

In order to put a problem into this machine—just as with the other
machines—first a mathematician who knows how the problem is to be
solved, and who knows how to organize it for the machine, lays out
the scheme of calculation. Then, a girl goes to one of the hand
perforators. Sitting at the keyboard, she presses keys and punches out
feet or yards of paper tape expressing the instructions and numbers
for the calculation. Each character punched—digit, letter, or sign—has
one or more of a maximum of 6 holes across the tape. Another girl,
using the other hand perforator, also punches out the instructions and
numbers for the calculation. If she wishes to erase a wrong character,
she can press an _erase key_ that punches all 6 holes, and then the
machine will pass by this row as if it were not there.

Three kinds of tapes are produced for the machine:

    _Problem tapes_, which contain information
       belonging to the particular problem.

    _Table tapes_, which contain tables of numbers to
       be referred to from time to time.

    _Routine tapes_, which contain the program, or
       routine, or sequence of steps that the machine is to
       carry out.

In each of these tapes one character takes up ⅒ of an inch along the
tape. In the case of a table tape, however, an ordinary 1-digit number
requires 4 characters on the tape, and a 7-digit number requires 11
characters on the tape. On a table tape there will be on the average
about 1 inch of tape per number.


The Processor

The two paper tapes prepared on the perforator should agree. But
whether or not they agree, a girl takes them over to the processor and
puts them both in. The processor has two tape feeds, and she puts one
tape on each and starts the machine. The processor compares them row by
row, making sure that they agree, and punches a new tape row by row.
If the two input tapes disagree, the processor stops. You can look to
see which tape is right, and then you can put the correct punch into
the new tape with a keyboard mounted on the processor. As the processor
compares the two input tapes, it also converts any number written in
the usual way into machine language. For example, the processor will
automatically translate 23,188 into +.231 8800 × 10⁺⁵. The processor
also puts in certain safeguards. If you want it to, the processor will
also make a printed record of a tape. Also, when a tape becomes worn
from use in the machine, you can put it into the processor and make a
fresh copy.


The Problem Positions

Next, the girl takes the punched tape made by the processor over to a
problem position that is idle. Two of the problem positions are always
busy guiding the two computers. The other two problem positions stand
by, ready to be loaded with problems.

A problem position looks like a large covered-over table. Under
the covers are 12 tape feeds, or _tape transmitters_. All these
transmitters look exactly alike except for their labels and consist
of regular teletype transmitters. Six-hole paper tape can be fed into
any transmitter. Six metal fingers sense the holes in the paper tape
and give out electrical impulses at proper times. At the front of the
problem position is a small group of switches that provide complete
control over the problem while it is on the machine. These are switches
for starting, disconnecting, momentary stop, etc.

One tape transmitter is the problem tape transmitter. It takes in
all the data for the problem such as the starting numbers. The first
thing it does at the start of a problem is to check (by comparing tape
numbers) that the right tapes are in the right feeds.

Five transmitters are routine tape transmitters. Each of these takes
in the sequence of computing steps. The routine tapes also contain
information for referring to table tapes and instructions for printing
and punching tape. The machine can choose according to instructions
between the five routine tapes and can choose between many different
sections on each tape. Therefore, we can use a large number of
different routines in a calculation, and this capacity makes the
machine versatile and powerful.

Six transmitters are table tape transmitters. They read tables of
numbers when directed to. A table tape can be as long as 100 feet and
will hold numbers at the rate of 1 inch per number, so that about 1200
numbers of seven decimal digits can be stored on a table tape.

When we look up a number in a table, such as the following,

          2½       3      3½   ···
       +————————————————————————————
     1 |1.02500 1.03000 1.03500
     2 |1.05063 1.06090 1.07123
     3 |1.07689 1.09273          ···
     4 |1.10381   ···     ···
     5 |1.13141   ···
     6 |1.15969
     7 |                  ···
     8 |          ···
     9 |  ···
    10 |
    ···|  ···

we look along the top and down the side until we find the column and
row of the number we are looking for. These are called the _arguments_
of the _tabular value_ that we are looking for (see Supplement 2).
Now when we put this table on a tape to go into the Bell Laboratories
machine, we write it all on one line, one figure after another, and we
punch it as follows:

    2-½   1-5     1.02500    1.05063    1.07689   1.10381    1.13141
      6-10    1.15969      ···      11-15   ···    ···      ···    3
      1-5   1.03000    1.06090    ···    ···    3½     1-5   1.03500
    ···

You will notice that the column labels 2½, 3, 3½ have been put on the
tape, each in front of the group of numbers they apply to. The row
labels 1 to 5, 6 to 10, ··· have also been put on the tape, each in
front of the group of numbers they apply to. The appropriate column
and row numbers, or arguments, must be put often on every table tape,
so that it is easy for the machine to tell what part of the table tape
it is reading.

In the Bell Laboratories machine, we do not need to put equal _blocks_
of arguments like 1-5, 6-10 ··· on the table tape. Instead we can put
individual arguments like 1, 2, 3, 4 ···, or, if we wish, we can use
blocks of different sizes, like 1-3, 4-15, 16-30···. For some tables,
such as income tax tables, it is very useful to have varying-sized
blocks of arguments. The machine, when hunting for a certain value in
the table, makes a comparison at each block of arguments.

The machine needs about 6 seconds to search a foot of tape. If we want
to set up a table economically, therefore, we need to consider the
average length of time needed for searching.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Scheme of a recorder.]

HOW INFORMATION COMES OUT OF THE MACHINE

At either one of the two recorders (Fig. 1), information comes out of
the machine, either in the form of printed characters or as punched
tape. The recorder consists of a _printer_, a _reperforator_, and
a tape transmitter. One recorder table belongs to each computer
and records the results it computes. The printer is a regular
teletypewriter connected to the machine. It translates information
produced by the machine as electrical impulses and prints the
information in letters and digits on paper. The reperforator is an
automatic tape punch. It translates information produced by the machine
in the form of electrical impulses and punches the information on
paper tape. Next to the tape punch is a tape transmitter. After the
tape comes through the punch, it is fed into the transmitter. Here the
machine can hunt for a previous result punched in the tape, read that
result, and use it again.


HOW INFORMATION IS MANIPULATED IN THE MACHINE

The main part of the computing system consists of 27 large frames
loaded with relays and wiring, called the _computer_, or _Computer 1_
and _Computer 2_. In this “telephone central station,” all the “phone
calls” from one number to another are attended to. There are 8 types of
these frames in the computer:

     FRAMES             NUMBER

    Storing register frames         6
    Printer frames                  2
    Problem frames                  2
    Position frames                 2
    Calculator frames               6
    Control frames                  2
    Routine frames                  4
    BTL (Block-Trig-Log) frames     2
    Permanent table frames          1
                                   ——
      Total                        27

In most but not quite all respects, the two halves, _Computer 1_ and
_Computer 2_, can compute independently. The _storing register frames_
hold enough relays to store 30 numbers. The registers for these
numbers are named _A, B, C, D_, ···, _M, N, O_ in two groups of 15
each. One group belongs to Computer 1 and the other to Computer 2. In
each Computer, the _calculator frames_ hold enough relays for storing
two numbers (held in the _X_ and _Y_ registers) and for performing
addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and square root. In
each Computer, the _problem frame_ stores the numbers that are read off
the problem tape and the table tapes, and the _printer frame_ stores
the numbers that are read into the printer. The printer frame also
stores indications, for example, the signs of numbers, plus or minus,
for purposes of combining them. These frames also hold the relays that
control the printer, the problem tape, and the table tapes. Jointly for
both Computers, the _position frames_ connect a problem in some problem
position to a Computer that becomes idle. For example, one problem
may finish in the middle of the night; the machine automatically and
unattended switches to another problem position and proceeds with the
instructions there contained. A backlog of computing on hand can be
stored in two of the problem positions, while the other two control the
two Computers. In each Computer, the _routine frames_ hold the relays
that make the Computer follow the routine instructions. Jointly for
both Computers, the remaining frames—the _control frames_, the _BTL
frames_, and the _permanent table frames_—hold the relays that control:
the alarms and lights for indicating failures; some circuits called the
BTL controls; the tape processor; and the mathematical tables that are
permanently wired into the machine. The permanent table frames hold the
following mathematical functions (see Supplement 2): _sine_, _cosine_,
_antitangent_, _logarithm_, and _antilogarithm_.


Storing

Numbers can be stored in the machine in the 30 regular storing
registers of both Computers together. They can also be stored, at the
cost of tying up some machine capacity, in the other registers: the 4
calculator registers, the 2 problem registers, the 2 table registers,
and the 2 printer registers. Numbers can also be punched out on tape,
in either of the two printers, and later read again from the tape.
Labels identifying the numbers can also be punched and read again from
the tape.

Each register in the machine stores a number in the biquinary notation,
as explained above. In programming the machine, after mentioning a
register it is necessary—as a part of the scheme for checking—to tell
the machine specifically whether to hold the number in the register or
to clear it.


Addition and Subtraction

The calculator frames can add two numbers together, if so instructed in
the routine tape. Suppose that the two numbers are in the registers
_B_ and _D_ and that we wish to put the sum in register _F_. Suppose
that we wish to clear the _D_ number but hold the _B_ number after
using them. The code on the routine tape is _B H_ + _D C_ = _F_. _H_
and _C_ coming right after the names of the registers always designate
“hold” and “clear,” respectively.

The calculator frames can, likewise, subtract a number. The routine
instruction _B H_-_D C_ = _F_ means:

    Take the number in register _B_ (hold it); subtract the
      number in _D_ (clear it); put the result in _F_


Multiplication and Division

The calculator frames perform multiplication by storing the digits of
the multiplier, adding the multiplicand over and over, and shifting,
until the product is obtained. However, if the multiplier is 1989, for
example, the calculator treats it as 2000-11. This short-cut applies
to digits 6, 7, 8, 9 and cuts the time required for multiplying. The
routine instruction is _B H_ × _D C_ = _F_.

The calculator performs division by repeated subtraction. The routine
instruction is _B H_ ÷ _D C_ = _F_. The operation signs +,-, ×, ÷
actually appear on the keyboard of the perforator and on the printed
tape produced by the printer.


Discrimination

_Discrimination_ is the term used in the Bell Laboratories computer for
what we have previously called selection, or comparison, or sequencing.
The _discriminator_ is a part of the calculator that compares or
selects or decides—“discriminates.” The discriminator can decide
whether a number is zero or not zero. In the language of the _algebra
of logic_ (see Chapter 9 and Supplement 2), if _a_ is a number, the
discriminator can find _T_(_a_ = 0). The discriminator can also decide
whether a number is positive or negative. In the language of logic, it
can find _T_(_a_ > 0) or _T_(_a_ < 0). The actions that a discriminator
can cause to be taken are:

    Stop the machine.
    Stop the problem, and proceed to another problem.
    Stop the routine going on, and proceed with a new routine.
    Permit printing, or prevent printing; etc.

In this way the discriminator can:

    Distinguish between right and wrong results.
    Tell that a certain result is impossible.
    Recognize a certain result to be the answer.
    Control the number of repetitions of a formula.
    Change from one formula to another formula.
    Check a number against a tolerance; etc.


PROBLEMS

Among the problems that have been placed on the machine successfully
are: solving the _differential equation_ of a _trajectory_ (see Chapter
5) and solving 32 _linear simultaneous equations_ in 32 _unknowns_ (see
Supplement 2). In the second case, the routine tapes were designed to
apply equally well to 11 to 100 linear equations in 11 to 100 unknowns.
However, the machine can do a very broad class of problems, including,
for example, computing a personal income tax. This calculation with all
its complexity of choices cannot be placed on any of the mechanical
brains described in previous chapters. The machine can, of course, be
used to calculate any tables that we may wish to refer to.


AN APPRAISAL OF THE CALCULATOR

The Bell Telephone Laboratories general-purpose relay computer is
probably the best mechanical brain made up to the end of 1947, in
regard to the two important factors of reliability and versatility.


Reliability

The machine produces results that are practically 100 per cent
reliable, for the machine checks each step before taking the next
one. The checking principle is that exactly a certain number of
relays must be energized. For example, as we said before, for each
decimal digit there are 7 relays. Exactly 2 of these relays must be
energized—no more, no less. If this does not happen, the machine stops
at once without losing any numbers. Lights shine for many circuits
in the control panel, and, if you compare what they ought to show
with what they do show, you can usually find at once the location of
the mistake. The trouble may be a speck of dirt between two contact
points on a relay, and, when it is brushed away, the machine can go
right ahead from where it stopped. According to a statement by Franz
L. Alt, director of the computing laboratory at the Ballistic Research
Laboratories, in December 1947, “the Bell machine had not given a
single wrong result in eight months of operation, except when operators
interfered with its normal running.”

To guard against the risk of putting tapes in the wrong transmitters,
the machine will check by the instructions contained in the tapes that
the right tapes are in the right places.


Time Required

The time required to do problems on this mechanical brain is perhaps
longer than on the others. The numbers are handled digit by digit on
the input tapes, and the typewriter in the recorder moves space by
space in order to get to the proper writing point. These are slow
procedures. The speeds of numerical operation are: addition, ³/₁₀
second; multiplication, 1 second on the average; division, 2.7 seconds
on the average; square root, 4.5 seconds on the average; logarithm,
about 15 seconds.


Staff

In order to operate the machine, the staff required is: one maintenance
man; one mathematical engineer; about six girls for punching tape,
etc., depending on the number of problems to be handled at the rate of
about one problem per week per girl. Unlike any of the other mechanical
brains built by the end of 1947, this machine will run unattended.


Maintenance

The relays in the machine will operate for years with no failure; they
have the experience of standard telephone techniques built into them.
Under laboratory conditions this type of relay had by 1946 operated
successfully much more than 100 million times. The tape feeding and
reading equipment in the machine may be maintained by periodic
inspection and service. The total number of teletype transmitters in
the machine is 38. If one fails, it is easy to plug in a spare.

The total power required for the machine is about 28 horsepower.
Batteries are furnished so that, if the power supply should be
interrupted, the machine can still operate for as long as a half-hour.


Cost

The cost of production of this machine in the size of 4 problem
positions and 2 computers has been roughly estimated as half a million
dollars. This cost includes material, manufacture, installation, and
testing. No development cost is included in this figure. Instead, the
cost of development has been reckoned as squaring with patents and
other contributions of the work to the telephone switching art.

It is unlikely that the general-purpose relay computer will be
manufactured generally. The pressure of orders for telephones, the
need to catch up with the backlog of demand, and the development of
electronic computers—all indicate that the Bell system will hardly
go further with this type of computer. In an emergency, however, the
Bell system would probably construct such machines for the government,
if requested. In the meantime, many principles first used in the
general-purpose relay computer are likely to find applications in
telephone system work. In fact, a present major development being
pursued in the telephone sections of Bell Laboratories is the
application of the computer principles to the automatic computation of
telephone bills.




Chapter 9

REASONING:

THE KALIN-BURKHART LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATOR


So far we have talked about mechanical brains that are mathematicians.
They are fond of numbers; their main work is with numbers; and the
other kinds of thinking they do are secondary. We now come to a
mechanical brain that is a logician. It is fond of reasoning—logic; its
main work is with what is logically true and what is logically false;
and it does not handle numbers. This mechanical brain was finished in
June 1947. It is called the _Kalin-Burkhart Logical-Truth Calculator_.
As its name tells, it calculates _logical truth_. Now what do we mean
by that?


TRUTH

To be true or false is a property of a statement. Usually we say that
a statement is true when it expresses a fact. For example, take the
statement “Salt dissolves in water.” We consider this statement to be
true because it expresses a fact. Actually, in this case we can roughly
prove the fact ourselves. We take a bowl, put some water in it, and put
in a little salt. After a while we look into the water and notice that
no salt whatever is to be seen.

Of course, this statement, like many another, occurs in a _context_
where certain things are understood. One of the understandings here,
for example, is “a small amount of salt in a much larger amount of
water.” For if we put a whole bag full of salt in just a little water,
not all the salt will dissolve. Nearly every statement occurs in a
context that we must know if we are to decide whether the statement is
true or false.


LOGICAL TRUTH

Logical truth is different from ordinary truth. With logical truth
we appeal not to facts but to suppositions. Usually we say that a
statement is logically true when it follows logically from certain
suppositions. In other words, we play a game that has useful, even
wonderful, results. The game starts with “if” or “suppose” or “let us
assume.” While the game lasts, any statement is logically true if it
follows logically from the suppositions.

For example, let us take five statements:

    1. “The earth is flat like a sheet of paper.”

    2. “The earth is round like a ball.”

    3. “John Doe travels as fast as he can, without turning
        to left or to right, for many days.”

    4. “John Doe will fall off the earth.”

    5. “John Doe will arrive back at his starting point.”

Let us also take a certain context in which: We know what we mean
by such words as “earth,” “flat,” “falling,” etc.; we have other
statements and understandings such as “if John Doe walks off the edge
of a cliff, he will fall,” “a flat sheet of paper has an edge,” etc.
In this context, if statements 1 and 3 are supposed, then statement
4 is logically true. On the other hand, if statements 2 and 3 are
supposed, then statement 5 is logically true. Of course, for many
centuries, nearly all men believed statement 1; and the importance of
the years 1492 to 1521 (Columbus to Magellan) is linked with the final
proof that statement 2 expresses a fact. So, depending on the game, or
the context, whichever we wish to call it, almost any statement can
be logically true. What we become interested in, therefore, is the
connections between statements which make them _follow logically_.


LOGICAL PATTERNS

Perhaps the most familiar example of “following logically” is a pattern
of words like the following:

    1. All igs are ows.
    2. All ows are umphs.
    3. Therefore, all igs are umphs.

If statements 1 and 2 are supposed, then statement 3 is logically true.
In other words, statement 3 logically follows from statements 1 and 2.
This word pattern is logically true, no matter what substitutions we
make for igs, ows, and umphs. For example, we can replace igs by men,
ows by animals, and umphs by mortals, and obtain:

    4. All men are animals.
    5. All animals are mortals.
    6. Therefore, all men are mortals.

The invented words “igs,” “ows,” “umphs” mark places in the _logical
pattern_ where we can insert any names we are interested in. The words
“all,” “are,” “therefore” and the ending s mark the logical pattern. Of
course, instead of using invented words like “igs,” “ows,” “umphs” we
would usually put _A_’s, _B_’s, _C_’s. This logical pattern is called a
_syllogism_ and is one of the most familiar. But there are even simpler
logical patterns that are also familiar.


THE SIMPLEST LOGICAL PATTERNS

Many simple logical patterns are so familiar that we often use them
without being conscious of doing so. The simple logical patterns are
marked by words like “and,” “or,” “else,” “not,” “if,” “then,” “only.”
In the same way, simple arithmetical patterns are marked by words like
“plus,” “minus,” “times,” “divided by.”

Let us see what some of these simple logical patterns are. Suppose that
we take two statements about which we have no factual information that
might interfere with logical supposing:

1. John Doe is eligible for insurance.

2. John Doe requires a medical examination.

In practice, we might be concerned with such statements when writing
the rules governing a plan of insurance for a group of employees. Here,
we shall play a game:

    (1) We shall make up some new statements from
        statements 1 and 2, using the words “and,”
         “or,” “else,” “not,” “if,” “then,” “only.”

    (2) We shall examine the logical patterns that we can make.

    (3) We shall see what we can find out about their
        logical truth.

Suppose we make up the following statements:

    3. John Doe is not eligible for insurance.

    4. John Doe does not require a medical examination.

    5. John Doe is eligible for insurance and requires a medical
       examination.

    6. John Doe is eligible for insurance, and John Doe is eligible
       for insurance.

    7. John Doe is eligible for insurance, or John Doe requires
       a medical examination.

    8. If John Doe is eligible for insurance, then he requires
       a medical examination.

    9. John Doe requires a medical examination if and only if
       he is eligible for insurance.

    10. John Doe is eligible for insurance or else he requires
        a medical examination.

Now clearly it is troublesome to repeat quantities of words when we
are interested only in the way that “and,” “or,” “else,” “not,” “if,”
“then,” “only” occur. So, let us use just 1 and 2 for the two original
statements, remembering that “1 AND 2” means here “statement 1 AND
statement 2” and does not mean 1 plus 2. Then we have:

     3: NOT-1
     4: NOT-2
     5: 1 AND 2
     6: 1 AND 1
     7: 1 OR 2
     8: IF 1, THEN 2
     9: 1 IF AND ONLY IF 2
    10: 1 OR ELSE 2

Here then are some simple logical patterns that we can make.


CALCULATION OF LOGICAL TRUTH

Now what can we find out about the logical truth of statements 3 to
10? If we know something about the truth or falsity of statements
1 and 2, what will logically follow about the truth or falsity of
statements 3 to 10? In other words, how can we calculate the logical
truth of statements 3 to 10, given the truth or falsity of statements 1
and 2?

For example, 3 is NOT-1; that is, statement 3 is the negative or the
_denial_ of statement 1. It follows logically that, if 1 is true, 3 is
false; if 1 is false, 3 is true. Suppose that we use _T_ for logically
true and _F_ for logically false. Then we can show our calculation of
the logical truth of statement 3 in Table 1.

       Table 1         Table 2

     1  | NOT-1 = 3    2  | NOT-2 = 4
        |                 |
    _T_ |    _F_      _T_ |    _F_
    _F_ |    _T_      _F_ |    _T_

Our rule for calculation is: For _T_ put _F_; for _F_ put _T_. Of
course, exactly the same rule applies to statements 2 and 4 (see Table
2). The _T_ and _F_ are called _truth values_. Any meaningful statement
can have truth values. This type of table is called a _truth table_.
For any logical pattern, we can make up a truth table.

Let us take another example, “AND.” Statement 5 is the same as
statement 1 AND statement 2. How can we calculate the logical truth of
statement 5? We can make up the same sort of a table as before. On the
left-hand side of this table, there will be 4 cases:

    1. Statement 1 true, statement 2 true.
    2. Statement 1 false, statement 2 true.
    3. Statement 1 true, statement 2 false.
    4. Statement 1 false, statement 2 false.

On the right-hand side of this table, we shall put down the truth
value of statement 5. Statement 5 is true if both statements 1 and
2 are true; statement 5 is false in the other cases. We know this
from our common everyday experience with the meaning of “AND” between
statements. So we can set up the truth table, and our rule for
calculation of logical truth, in the case of AND, is shown on Table 3.

          Table 3

     1   2  | 1 AND 2 = 5
            |
    _T_ _T_ |     _T_
    _F_ _T_ |     _F_
    _T_ _F_ |     _F_
    _F_ _F_ |     _F_

“AND” and the other words and phrases joining together the original two
statements to make new statements are called _connectives_, or _logical
connectives_. The connectives that we have illustrated in statements 7
to 10 are: OR, IF ··· THEN, IF AND ONLY IF, OR ELSE.

Table 4 shows the truth table that applies to statements 7, 8, 9, and
10. This truth table expresses the calculation of the logical truth or
falsity of these statements.

                            Table 4

                                     1 IF AND
             1 OR 2   IF 1, THEN 2   ONLY IF 2   1 OR ELSE 2
     1   2  |  = 7         = 8           = 9         = 10
            |
    _T_ _T_ |  _T_         _T_           _T_          _F_
    _F_ _T_ |  _T_         _T_           _F_          _T_
    _T_ _F_ |  _T_         _F_           _F_          _T_
    _F_ _F_ |  _F_         _T_           _T_          _F_

The “OR” (as in statement 7) that is defined in the truth table is
often called the _inclusive “or”_ and means “AND/OR.” Statement 7,
“1 OR 2,” is considered to be the same as “1 OR 2 OR BOTH.” There is
another “OR” in common use, often called the _exclusive “or,”_ meaning
“OR ELSE” (as in statement 10). Statement 10, “1 OR ELSE 2,” is the
same as “1 OR 2 BUT NOT BOTH” or “EITHER 1 OR 2.” In ordinary English,
there is some confusion over these two “OR’s.” Usually we rely on
the context to tell which one is intended. Of course, such reliance
is not safe. Sometimes we rely on a necessary conflict between the
two statements connected by “OR” which prevents the “both” case from
being possible. In Latin the two kinds of “OR” were distinguished by
different words, _vel_ meaning “AND/OR,” and _aut_ meaning “OR ELSE.”

The “IF ··· THEN” that is defined in the truth table agrees with our
usual understanding that (1) when the “IF clause” is true, the “THEN
clause” must be true; and (2) when the “IF clause” is false, the “THEN
clause” may be either true or false. The “IF AND ONLY IF” that is
defined in the truth table agrees with our usual understanding that (1)
if either clause is true, the other is true; and (2) if either clause
is false, the other is false.

In statement 6, there are only two possible cases, and the truth table
is shown in Table 5.

        Table 5

     1  | 1 AND 1 = 6
        |
    _T_ |      _T_
    _F_ |      _F_

We know that 6 is true if and only if 1 is true. In other words, the
statement “1 AND 1 IF AND ONLY IF 1” is true, no matter what statement
1 may refer to. It is because of this fact that we never use a
statement in the form “1 and 1”: it can always be replaced by the plain
statement “1.”


LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATION BY EXAMINING CASES AND REASONING

Now you may say that this is all very well, but what good is it? Almost
anybody can use these connectives correctly and certainly has had a
great deal of practice using them. Why do we need to go into truth
values and truth tables?

When we draft a contract or a set of rules, we often have to consider
several conditions that give rise to a number of cases. We must avoid:

    1. All _conflicts_, in which two statements that disagree
       apply to the same case.

    2. All _loopholes_, in which there is a case not covered
       by any statement.

If we have one statement or condition only, we have to consider 2
possible cases: the condition satisfied or the statement true;
the condition not satisfied or the statement false. If we have 2
conditions, we have to consider 4 possible cases: true, true; false,
true; true, false; false, false. If we have 3 conditions, we have to
consider 8 possible cases one after the other (see Table 6).


Table 6

    CASE   1ST CONDITION   2ND CONDITION   3RD CONDITION

     1          _T_             _T_             _T_
     2          _F_             _T_             _T_
     3          _T_             _F_             _T_
     4          _F_             _F_             _T_

     5          _T_             _T_             _F_
     6          _F_             _T_             _F_
     7          _T_             _F_             _F_
     8          _F_             _F_             _F_

Instead of _T_’s and _F_’s, we would ordinarily use _check-marks_ (✓)
and _crosses_ (✕), which, of course, have the same meaning. We may
consider and study each case individually. In any event, we must make
sure that the proposed contract or set of rules covers all the cases
without conflicts or loopholes.

The number of possible cases that we have to consider doubles whenever
one more condition is added. Clearly, it soon becomes too much work
to consider each case individually, and so we must turn to a second
method, thoughtful classifying and reasoning about classes of cases.

Now suppose that the number of conditions increases: 4 conditions give
rise to 16 possible cases; 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, ··· conditions give rise
to 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, ··· cases respectively. Because of the
large number of cases, we soon begin to make mistakes while reasoning
about classes of cases. We need a more efficient way of knowing whether
all cases are covered properly.


LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATION BY ALGEBRA

One of the more efficient ways of reasoning is often called the
_algebra of logic_. This algebra is a part of a new science called
_mathematical logic_. Mathematical logic is a science that has the
following characteristics:

    It studies chiefly nonnumerical reasoning.

    It seeks accurate meanings and necessary consequences.

    Its chief instruments are efficient symbols.

Mathematical logic studies especially the logical relations expressed
in such words as “or,” “and,” “not,” “else,” “if,” “then,” “only,”
“the,” “of,” “is,” “every,” “all,” “none,” “some,” “same,” “different,”
etc. The algebra of logic studies especially only the first seven of
these words.

The great thinkers of ancient Greece first studied the problems
of logical reasoning as these problems turned up in philosophy,
psychology, and debate. Aristotle originated what was called _formal
logic_. This was devoted mainly to variations of the logical pattern
shown above called the syllogism. In the last 150 years, the fine
symbolic techniques developed by mathematicians were applied to
the problems of the calculation of logical truth, and the result
was mathematical logic, much broader and much more powerful than
formal logic. A milestone in the development of mathematical logic
was _The Laws of Thought_, written by George Boole, a great English
mathematician, and published in 1854. Boole introduced the branch of
mathematical logic called the algebra of logic, also called _Boolean
algebra_. In late years, all the branches of mathematical logic have
been improved and made easier to use.

We can give a simple numerical example of Boolean algebra and how it
can calculate logical truth. Suppose that we take the truth value of a
statement as 1 if it is true and 0 if it is false. Now we have numbers
1 and 0 instead of letters _T_ and _F_. Since they are numbers, we can
add them, subtract them, and multiply them. We can also make up simple
numerical formulas that will let us calculate logical truth. If _P_
and _Q_ are statements, and if _p_ and _q_ are their truth values,
respectively, we have Table 7.


Table 7

        STATEMENT             TRUTH VALUE
    NOT-_P_                   1 - _p_
    _P_ AND _Q_               _pq_
    _P_ OR _Q_                _p_ + _q_ - _pq_
    IF _P_, THEN _Q_          1 - _p_ + _pq_
    _P_ IF AND ONLY IF _Q_    1 - _p_ - _q_ + 2_pq_
    _P_ OR ELSE _Q_           _p_ + _q_ - 2_pq_

For example, suppose that we have two statements _P_ and _Q_:

    _P_: John Doe is eligible for insurance.

    _Q_: John Doe requires a medical examination.

To test that the truth value of “_P_ OR _Q_” is _p_ + _q_-_pq_, let us
put down the four cases, and calculate the result (see Table 8).


Table 8

    _p_ _q_ | _p_ + _q_ - _pq_
                      |
     1   1  | 1 + 1 - 1 = 1
     0   1  | 0 + 1 - 0 = 1
     1   0  | 1 + 0 - 0 = 1
     0   0  | 0 + 0 - 0 = 0

Now we know that _P_ or _Q_ is true if and only if either one or both
of _P_ and _Q_ are true, and thus we see that the calculation is
correct.

The algebra of logic (see also Supplement 2) is a more efficient way of
calculating logical truth. But it is still a good deal of work to use
the algebra. For example, if we have 10 conditions, we shall have 10
letters like _p_, _q_ to handle in calculations. Thus we need a still
more efficient way.


CALCULATION OF CIRCUITS BY THE ALGEBRA OF LOGIC

In 1937 a research assistant at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Claude E. Shannon, was studying for his degree of master of science.
He was enrolled in the Department of Electrical Engineering. He was
interested in automatic switching circuits and wondered why an algebra
should not apply to them. He wrote his thesis on the answer to this
question and showed that:

    (1) There is an algebra that applies to switching circuits.

    (2) It is the algebra of logic.

A paper, based on his thesis, was published in 1938 in the
_Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers_ with
the title “A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and Switching Circuits.”

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Switches in series.]

For a simple example of what Shannon found out, suppose that we have
two switches, 1, 2, in series (see Fig. 1). When do we get current
flowing from the source to the sink? There are 4 possible cases and
results (see Table 9).


Table 9

    SWITCH 1 IS CLOSED   SWITCH 2 IS CLOSED   CURRENT FLOWS
           Yes                  Yes                Yes
           No                   Yes                No
           Yes                  No                 No
           No                   No                 No

Now what does this table remind us of? It is precisely the truth table
for “AND.” It is just what we would have if we wrote down the truth
table of the statement “Switch 1 is closed AND switch 2 is closed.”

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Switches in parallel.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Switch open—current flowing.]

Suppose that we have two switches 1, 2 in parallel (see Fig. 2). When
do we get current flowing from the source to the sink? Answer: when
either one or both of the switches are closed. Therefore, this circuit
is an exact representation of the statement “Switch 1 is closed or
switch 2 is closed.”

Suppose that we have a switch that has two positions, and at any time
must be at one and only one of these two positions (see Fig. 3).
Suppose that current flows only when the switch is open. There are two
possible cases and results (see Table 10).


Table 10

    SWITCH 1 IS CLOSED   CURRENT FLOWS

           Yes                No
           No                 Yes

This is like the truth table for “NOT”; and this circuit is an exact
representation of the statement “Switch 1 is NOT closed.” (_Note_:
These examples are in substantial agreement with Shannon’s paper,
although Shannon uses different conventions.)

We see, therefore, that there is a very neat correspondence between the
algebra of logic and automatic switching circuits. Thus it happens that:

    1. The algebra of logic can be used in the calculation of
       some electrical circuits.

    2. Some electrical circuits can be used in the calculations
       of the algebra of logic.

This fact is what led to the next step.


LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATION BY MACHINE

In 1946 two undergraduates at Harvard University, Theodore A. Kalin
and William Burkhart, were taking a course in mathematical logic.
They noticed that there were a large number of truth tables to be
worked out. To work them out took time and effort and yet was a rather
tiresome automatic process not requiring much thinking. They had had
some experience with electrical circuits. Knowing of Shannon’s work,
they said to each other, “Why not build an electrical machine to
calculate truth tables?”

They took about two months to decide on the essential design of the
machine:

    1. The machine would have dial switches in which logical
       connectives would be entered.

    2. It would have dial switches in which the numbers of
       statements like 1, 2, 3 ··· would be entered.

    3. It would scan the proper truth table line by line by
       sending electrical pulses through the dial switches.

    4. It would compute the truth or falsehood of the whole
       expression.


CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION OF THE KALIN-BURKHART LOGICAL-TRUTH
CALCULATOR

With the designs in mind, Kalin and Burkhart bought some war surplus
materials, including relays, switches, wires, lights, and a metal
box about 30 inches long by 16 inches tall, and 13 inches deep. From
March to June, 1947, they constructed a machine in their spare time,
assembling and mounting the parts inside the box. The total cost of
materials was about $150. In June the machine was demonstrated in
Cambridge, Mass., before several logicians and engineers, and in August
it was moved for some months to the office of a life insurance company.
There some study was made of the possible application of the machine in
drafting contracts and rules.


GENERAL ORGANIZATION OF THE MACHINE

The logical-truth calculator built by Kalin and Burkhart is not giant
in size, although giant in capacity. Like other mechanical brains,
the machine is made up of many pieces of a rather small number of
different kinds of parts. The machine contains about 45 dial switches,
23 snap switches (or two-position switches), 85 relays, 6 push buttons,
less than a mile of wire, etc. The lid of the metal box is the front,
vertical panel of the machine.


UNITS OF THE MACHINE

The machine contains 16 units. These units are listed in Table 11, in
approximately the order in which they appear on the front panel of the
machine—row by row from top to bottom, and from left to right in each
row.


Table 11

UNITS, THEIR NAMES, AND SIGNIFICANCE

    UNIT ROW   PART       NO. MARK      NAME            SIGNIFICANCE

     1    1 Small red     12  —   _Statement truth-_  Output: glows if
            lights                   _value lights_      statement is
                                                         assumed true
                                                         in the case
     2    1 2-position    12   ~   _Statement denial_  Input: if up,
            snap switches            _switches_          statement
                                                         is denied
     3    2 14-position   12  _V_  _Statement_         Input of
            dial switches            _switches_          statements
     4    3 4-position    11  _k_  _Connective_        Input of
            dial switches           _switches_           connectives:
                                                       ∧ (and),
                                                       ∨ (or),
                                                       ▲ (if-then),
                                                       ▼ (if and only if)
     5    4 11-position   11  _A_  _Antecedent_        Input of
            dial switches           _switches_           antecedents
     6    5 11-position   11  _C_  _Consequent_        Input of
            dial switches           _switches_           consequents
     7    6 2-position    11  _S_  _Stop switches_     Input: if up,
            snap switches                                associates
                                                         connective to
                                                         main truth-value
                                                         light
     8    6 2-position    11   ~   _Connective denial_ Input: if up,
            snap switches            _switches_          statement
                                                         produced by
                                                         connective is
                                                         denied
     9    7 Red light and  1 Start _Automatic start_   Input: causes the
            large button                                 calc. to start
                                                         down a
                                                         truth table
                                                         automatically
    10    7 Red light and  1 Start  _Power switch_     Input: turns the
            2 buttons        Stop                        power on or off
    11    7 2-position     1 Stop  “_Stop-on-true-or-_  Input: causes the
            snap switch              _false_” _switch_   calc.to stop
            and red                                      either on true
            button                                       cases or on
                                                         false cases
    12    7 Yellow light   1  —   _Main truth-value_  Output: glows if
                                     _light_             the statement
                                                         produced by the
                                                         main connective
                                                         is true for the
                                                         case
    13    7 Large button   1 Man.  _Manual pulse_      Input: causes the
                  Pulse              _button_            calc. to go
                                                         to the next line
                                                         of a truth table
    14    7 11-position    1 _kⱼ_  _Connective check_  Output: glows when
            dial switch            _switch and light_    any specified
                                                         connective is
                                                         true
    15    7 13-position    1  TT  “_Truth-table-row-_ Input: causes the
            dial switch       Row   _stop_” _switch_    calc. to stop on
                              Stop                       last row of the
                                                         the truth table
    16 Be-   Continuous    1  —   _Timing control_    Input: controls the
       tween dial knob                _knob_              speed at which
       6 & 7 and button                                   the calculator
                                                          scans rows of
                                                          the truth table

Some of the words appearing in this table need to be defined.
_Connective_ here means “AND,” “OR,” “IF ··· THEN,” “IF AND ONLY IF.”
Only these four connectives appear on the machine; others when needed
can be constructed from these. The symbols used for these connectives
in mathematical logic are ∧, ∨, ▲, ▼. These signs serve as labels
for the connective switch points. In this machine, when there is a
connective between two statements, the statement that comes before is
called the _antecedent_ and the statement that comes after is called
the _consequent_.


HOW INFORMATION GOES INTO THE MACHINE

Of the 16 units 13 are input units. They control the setup of the
machine so that it can solve a problem. Of the 13 input units, those
that have the most to do with taking in the problem are shown in Table
12.


Table 12

          Name of                               KIND OF
    UNIT  SWITCHES   MARK   SWITCH          SWITCH SETTINGS

     3   Statement  _V_₁ to  Dial    Statements 1 to 12 or constant
                     _V_₁₂                 _T_ or _F_
     2   Statement     ~     Snap     Affirmative (down) or negative
           denial                               (up)
     4   Connective _k_₁ to  Dial    ∧ (AND),
                     _k_₁₁           ∨ (OR),
                                      ▲ (IF-THEN),
                                      ▼ (IF AND ONLY IF)
     8   Connective      ~   Snap     Affirmative (down) or negative
           denial                              (up)
     5   Antecedent _A_₁ to  Dial     _V_ or various _k_’s
                     _A_₁₁
     6   Consequent _C_₁ to  Dial     _V_ or various _k_’s
                     _C_₁₁
     7   Stop       _S_₁ to  Snap     Not connected (down) or
                     _S_₁₁               connected (up)

The first step in putting a problem on the machine is to express the
whole problem as a single compound statement that we want to know the
truth or falsity of. We express the single compound statement in a form
such as the following:

    _V k V k V k V k V k V k V k V k V k V k V k V_

where each _V_ represents a statement, each _k_ represents a
connective, and we know the grouping, or in other words, we know the
antecedent and consequent of each connective.

For example, let us choose a problem with an obvious answer:

    PROBLEM. Given: statement 1 is true; and if statement 1 is true,
    then statement 2 is true; and if statement 2 is true, then statement
    3 is true; and if statement 3 is true, then statement 4 is true.
    Is statement 4 true?

How do we express this whole problem in a form that will go on the
machine? We express the whole problem as a single compound statement
that we want to know the truth or falsity of:

If [1 and (if 1 then 2) and (if 2 then 3) and (if 3 then 4)], then 4

The 8 statements occurring in this problem are, respectively: 1 1 2 2
3 3 4 4. These are the values at which the _V_ switches (the statement
dial switches, Unit 2) from _V_₁ to _V_₈ are set. The 7 connectives
occurring in this problem are, respectively: AND, IF-THEN, AND,
IF-THEN, AND, IF-THEN, IF-THEN. These are the values at which the _k_
switches (the connective dial switches, Unit 4) from _k_₁ to _k_₇ are
set.

A grouping (one of several possible groupings) that specifies the
antecedent and consequent of each connective is the following:

    1 AND 1 IF-THEN 2 AND 2 IF-THEN 3 AND 3 IF-THEN 4 IF-THEN 4
          |         |     |         |     |         |
          +—————————+     +—————————+     +—————————+
             _k_₂            _k_₄            _k_₆
    |               |     |                         |
    +———————————————+     +—————————————————————————+
     _k_₁                            _k_₅
    |                                               |
    +———————————————————————————————————————————————+
                     _k_₃
    |                                                         |
    +—————————————————————————————————————————————————————————+
                                                        _k_₇

The grouping has here been expressed graphically with lines but may be
expressed in the normal mathematical way with parentheses and brackets
as follows:

    {[1 AND (1 IF-THEN 2)] AND [(2 IF-THEN 3) AND
       (3 IF-THEN 4)]} IF-THEN 4.

So the values at which the antecedent and consequent dial switches are
set are as shown in Table 13.


Table 13

                ANTECEDENT          CONSEQUENT
    CONNECTIVE    SWITCH    SET AT    SWITCH     SET AT
       _k_₁        _A_₁       _V_      _C_₁        _k_₂
       _k_₂        _A_₂       _V_      _C_₂        _V_
       _k_₃        _A_₃       _k_₁     _C_₃        _k_₅
       _k_₄        _A_₄       _V_      _C_₄        _V_
       _k_₅        _A_₅       _k_₄     _C_₅        _k_₆
       _k_₆        _A_₆       _V_      _C_₆        _V_
       _k_₇        _A_₇       _k_₃     _C_₇        _V_

In any problem, statements that are different are numbered one after
another 1, 2, 3, 4 ···. A statement that is repeated bears always the
same number. In nearly all cases that are interesting, there will be
repetitions of the statements. If any statement appeared with a “NOT”
in it, we would turn up the denial switch for that statement (Unit 2).

The different connectives available on the machine are “AND,” “OR,” “IF
··· THEN,” “IF AND ONLY IF.” If a “NOT” affected the compound statement
produced by any connective, we would turn up the denial switch for that
connective (Unit 8).

The last step in putting the problem on the machine is to connect the
main connective of the whole compound statement to the yellow light
output (Unit 12). In this problem the last “IF-THEN,” _k_₇, is the
main connective, the one that produces the whole compound statement.
So we turn Stop Switch 7 (in Unit 7) that belongs to _k_₇ into the
up position. There are a few more things to do, naturally, but the
essential part of putting the information of the problem into the
machine has now been described.


HOW INFORMATION COMES OUT OF THE MACHINE

Of the 16 units listed in Table 11, 3 are output units, and only 2 of
these are really important, as shown in Table 14.


Table 14

    UNIT       NAME OF LIGHT          MARK       KIND OF LIGHT
      1     Statement truth value  _V_₁ to _V_₁₂   Small, red
     13     Main truth value                       Large, yellow

The answer to a problem is shown by a pattern of the lights of Units
1 and 13. The pattern of lights is equivalent to a row of the truth
table. Each little red light (Unit 1) glows when its statement is
assumed to be true, and it is dark when its statement is assumed to
be false. The yellow light (Unit 13) glows when the whole compound
statement is calculated to be logically true, and it is dark when the
whole compound statement is calculated to be logically false.

The machine turns its “attention” automatically to each line of the
truth table one after the other, and pulses are fed in according to the
pattern of assumed true statements. We can set the machine to stop on
true cases or on false cases or on every case, so as to give us time
to copy down whichever kind of results we are interested in. When we
have noted the case, we can press a button and the machine will then go
ahead searching for more cases.


A COMPLETE AND CONCRETE EXAMPLE

The reader may still be wondering when he will see a complete and
concrete example of the application of the logical-truth calculator. So
far we have given only pieces of examples in order to illustrate some
explanation. Therefore, let us consider now the following problem:

    PROBLEM. The A. A. Adams Co., Inc., has about
    1000 employees. About 600 of them are insured under a
    contract for group insurance with the I. I. Insurance
    Co. Mr. Adams decides that more of his employees ought
    to be insured. As a part of his study of the change, he
    asks his manager in charge of the group insurance plan,
    “What are the possible statuses of my employees who are
    not insured?”

    The manager replies, “I can tell you the names of the
    men who are not insured, and all the data you may want
    to know about them.”

    Mr. Adams says, “No, John, that won’t be enough, for I
    need to know whether there are any groups or classes
    that for some basic reason I should exclude from the
    change I am considering.”

    So the manager goes to work with the following 5 statuses and
    the following 5 rules, and he produces the following answer.
    Our question is, “Is he right, or has he made a mistake?”

    _Statuses._ A status for any employee is a report about
    that employee, answering all the following 5 questions with
    “yes” or “no.”

    1. Is the employee eligible for insurance?

    2. Has the employee applied for insurance?

    3. Has the employee’s application for insurance been approved?

    4. Does the employee require a medical examination for insurance?

    5. Is the employee insured?

_Rules._ The rules applying to employees are:

    _A._ Any employee, to be insured, must be eligible
      for insurance, must make application for insurance,
      and must have such application for insurance approved.

    _B._ Only eligible employees may apply for
      insurance.

    _C._ The application of any person eligible
      for insurance without medical examination is
      automatically approved.

    _D._ (Naturally) an application can be approved
      only if the application is made.

    _E._ (Naturally) a medical examination will not be
      required from any person not eligible for insurance.

    _Answer by the Manager._ There are 5 possible
      combinations of statuses for employees who are not
      insured, as shown in Table 15.


Table 15


     POSSIBLE                         STATUS 3,   STATUS 4,
    COMBINATION  STATUS 1, STATUS 2, APPLICATION EXAMINATION  STATUS 5,
    OF STATUSES  ELIGIBLE   APPLIED   APPROVED    REQUIRED     INSURED

          1        Yes       Yes        Yes          Yes         No
          2        Yes       Yes        Yes          No          No
          3        Yes       Yes        No           Yes         No
          4        Yes       No         Yes          No          No
          5        No        No         No           No          No

The question may be asked why employees who are eligible, who have
applied for insurance, who have had their applications approved, and
who require no medical examination (combination 2) are yet not insured.
The answer is that the rules given do not logically lead to this
conclusion. As a matter of fact, there might be additional rules, such
as: any sick employee must first return to work; or any period from
date of approval of application to the first of the following month
must first pass.

The first step in putting this problem on the Kalin-Burkhart
Logical-Truth Calculator is to rephrase the rules, using the language
of the connectives that we have on the machine. The rules rephrased are:

    _A._ If an employee is insured, then he is
      eligible, he has applied for insurance, and his
      application has been approved.

    IF 5, THEN 1 AND 2
      AND 3

    _B._ If an employee has applied (under these
      rules) for insurance, then he is eligible.

    IF 2, THEN 1

    _C._ If an employee is eligible for insurance, has
      applied, and requires no medical examination, his
      application is automatically approved.

    IF 1 AND 2 AND
      NOT-4, THEN 3

    _D._ If an employee’s application has been
      approved, then he has applied.

    IF 3, THEN 2

    _E._ If an employee is not eligible, then he does
      not require a medical examination (under these rules).

    IF NOT-1, THEN NOT-4

To get the answer we seek, we must add one more rule _for this answer
only_:

    _F._ The employee is not insured.
          NOT-5

We now have a total of 4 + 2 + 4 + 2 + 2 + 1 occurrences of statements,
or 15 occurrences. This is beyond the capacity of the existing machine.
But fortunately Rule _F_ and Rule _A_ cancel each other; they may both
be omitted; and this gives us 10 occurrences instead of 15. In other
words, all the possible statuses under “Rule _B_ AND Rule _C_ AND Rule
_D_ AND Rule _E_” will give us the answer we seek.

The rephrasing and reasoning we have done here is perhaps not easy. For
example, going from the logical pattern

Only igs may be ows to the logical pattern

    If it is an ow, then it is an ig

as we did in rephrasing Rule _B_, deserves rather more thought and
discussion than we can give to the subject here. A person who is
responsible for preparing problems for the Logical-Truth Calculator
should know the algebra of logic.

Choosing an appropriate grouping, we now set on the machine:

    {(IF 2, THEN 1) AND [IF (1 AND 2) AND NOT-4, THEN 3]} AND
    [(IF 3, THEN 2) AND (IF NOT-1, THEN NOT-4)]

The setting is as shown in Table 16. After this setting, the machine is
turned on and set to stop on the “true” cases. The


Table 16

SETTING OF THE PROBLEM ON THE LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATOR

    UNIT
      3    Statement Dial No.         _V_₁ _V_₂ _V_₃ _V_₄ _V_₅ _V_₆
      3    Statement Dial Setting      2    1    1    2    4    3
      2    Statement Denial Switch
             Setting                   —    —    —    —    up   —
      4    Connective Dial No.        _k_₁ _k_₂ _k_₃ _k_₄ _k_₅ _k_₆
      4    Connective Dial Setting     ▲    ∧   ∧   ∧    ▲   ∧
      8    Connective Denial Switch
             Setting                   —    —    —    —    —    —
      5    Antecedent Dial No.        _A_₁ _A_₂ _A_₃ _A_₄ _A_₅ _A_₆
      5    Antecedent Dial Setting    _V_  _k_₁ _V_  _k_₃ _k_₄ _k_₂
      6    Consequent Dial No.        _C_₁ _C_₂ _C_₃ _C_₄ _C_₅ _C_₆
      6    Consequent Dial Setting    _V_  _k_₅ _V_  _V_  _V_  _k_₈
      7    Stop Switches, associating
             connective to Main
             Truth-Value Light         —    —    —    —    —    up
     -----------------------------------------------------------------
      3    Statement Dial No.         _V_₇ _V_₈ _V_₉ _V_₁₀ _V_₁₁ _V_₁₂
      3    Statement Dial Setting      3    2    1    4    _F_   _F_
      2    Statement Denial Switch
             Setting                   —    —    up   up    —     —
      4    Connective Dial No.        _k_₇ _k_₈ _k_₉ _k_₁₀ _k_₁₁
      4    Connective Dial Setting     ▲    ∧   ▲   off   off
      8    Connective Denial Switch
             Setting                   —    —    —    —     —
      5    Antecedent Dial No.        _A_₇ _A_₈ _A_₉ _A_₁₀ _A_₁₁
      5    Antecedent Dial Setting    _V_  _k_₇ _V_  off   off
      6    Consequent Dial No.        _C_₇ _C_₈ _C_₉ _C_₁₀ _C_₁₁
      6    Consequent Dial Setting    _V_  _k_₉ _V_  off   off
      7    Stop Switches, associating
             connective to Main
             Truth-Value Light         —    —    —    —     —
possible statuses of employees who are not insured are shown in
Table 17. As we look down the last column in Table 17, we observe 6
occurrences of _T_, instead of 5 as the manager determined (see Table
15). Thus, when we compare the manager’s result with the machine
result, we find an additional possible combination to be reported to
Mr. Adams, combination 7:

    Employee eligible, employee has not applied, employee’s
      application not approved, employee requires a medical
      examination, employee not insured.


Table 17

SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM BY THE CALCULATOR

      LEGEND:
      {A} THE EMPLOYEE IS ELIGIBLE FOR INSURANCE
      {B} THE EMPLOYEE HAS APPLIED FOR INSURANCE
      {C} THE EMPLOYEE’S APPLICATION FOR INSURANCE HAS BEEN APPROVED
      {D} THE EMPLOYEE REQUIRES A MEDICAL EXAMINATION
      {E} THE EMPLOYEE IS INSURED
      {F} CASE, OR COMBINATION NO.
      {G} THE COMBINATION DOES NOT CONTRADICT THE RULES,
             I.E., THE YELLOW LIGHT IS ON

             {A}   {B}   {C}   {D}   {E}   {F}   {G}
    _Status_: 1     2     3     4     5
             _T_   _T_   _T_   _T_   _F_    1    _T_
             _F_   _T_   _T_   _T_   _F_    2    _F_
             _T_   _F_   _T_   _T_   _F_    3    _F_
             _F_   _F_   _T_   _T_   _F_    4    _F_

             _T_   _T_   _F_   _T_   _F_    5    _T_
             _F_   _T_   _F_   _T_   _F_    6    _F_
             _T_   _F_   _F_   _T_   _F_    7    _T_
             _F_   _F_   _F_   _T_   _F_    8    _F_

             _T_   _T_   _T_   _F_   _F_    9    _T_
             _F_   _T_   _T_   _F_   _F_   10    _F_
             _T_   _F_   _T_   _F_   _F_   11    _F_
             _F_   _F_   _T_   _F_   _F_   12    _F_

             _T_   _T_   _F_   _F_   _F_   13    _F_
             _F_   _T_   _F_   _F_   _F_   14    _F_
             _T_   _F_   _F_   _F_   _F_   15    _T_
             _F_   _F_   _F_   _F_   _F_   16    _T_

Because of the medical examination, this additional class of employee
would need to be considered rather carefully in any change of the group
insurance plan.


AN APPRAISAL OF THE CALCULATOR

In appraising the Kalin-Burkhart Logical-Truth Calculator, we must
remember that this is a first model. It was the only machine of its
kind up to the end of 1948; and it worked.

The cost of the machine, as stated before, was about $150 of parts and
perhaps $1000 of labor. This is less than ¹/₁₀₀ of the cost of the
other giant brains described in previous chapters. Yet we can properly
call this machine a mechanical brain because it transfers information
automatically from one part to another of the machine, has automatic
control over the sequence of operations, and does certain kinds of
reasoning.

The machine is swift. It can check up to a 100 cases against a set of
rules in less than 1 minute. It can check: 128 cases for 7 conditions
in 1¼ minutes, 256 cases for 8 conditions in 2½ minutes, and 4096 cases
for 12 conditions in 38 minutes. That is the limit of the present
machine. Of course, setting up the machine to do a problem takes some
more time.

The programming of this machine to do a problem is less complicated
than the programming of most of the big machines previously described.
Of course, in order to prepare a problem for the machine, the preparer
needs to know a fair amount of the algebra of logic. This, however, is
not very hard. As to reliability, the machine has in practice been out
of order less than 2 per cent of operating time.

The big barrier to wide use of the machine, of course, is lack of
understanding of the field of problems in which it can be applied.
Even in this modern world of ours, we are in rather a primitive stage
in regard to recognizing problems in logical truth and knowing how to
calculate it. Here, however, is an electrical instrument for logical
reasoning, and it seems likely that its applications will multiply.




Chapter 10

AN EXCURSION:

THE FUTURE DESIGN OF MACHINES THAT THINK


In the previous chapters we have described four giant mechanical
brains finished by the end of 1946: Massachusetts Institute of
Technology’s Differential Analyzer No. 2, Harvard’s IBM Automatic
Sequence-Controlled Calculator, Moore School of Electrical
Engineering’s Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (Eniac),
and Bell Telephone Laboratories’ General-Purpose Relay Computer. All
these brains have actually worked long enough to have demonstrated
thoroughly some facts of great importance.


WHAT EXISTING MACHINES HAVE PROVED

The existing mechanical brains have proved that information can be
automatically transferred between any two registers of a machine.
No human being is needed to pick up a physical piece of information
produced in one part of the machine, personally move it to another part
of the machine, and there put it in again. We can think of a mechanical
brain as something like a battery of desk calculators or punch-card
machines all cabled together and communicating automatically.

The existing mechanical brains have also proved that flexible,
automatic control over long sequences of operations is possible. We can
lay out the whole routine to solve a problem, translate it into machine
language, and put it into the machine. Then we press the “start”
button; the machine starts whirring and prints out the answers as it
obtains them. Mechanical brains have removed the limits on complexity
of routine: the machine can carry out a complicated routine as easily
as a simple one.

The existing giant brains have shown that a machine with hundreds of
thousands of parts will work successfully. It will operate accurately,
it will run unattended, and it will have remarkably few mechanical
troubles.

These machines have shown that enormous speeds can be realized: 5000
additions a second is Eniac’s record. High speed is needed for many
problems in science, government, and business. In fact, there are
economic and statistical problems, now settled by armchair methods,
for which high-speed mechanical brains may make it possible to compute
answers rather than guess them.

Also, these machines have been shown to be reasonable in cost. The cost
of each of the large calculators is in the neighborhood of $250,000 to
$500,000. If we assume a ten-year life, which is conservative, the cost
is about $3 to $6 an hour for 24-hour operation. Since each mechanical
brain can, for problems for which it is suited, do the work of a
hundred human computers, such a machine can save its cost half a dozen
times. And these machines are only engineers’ models, built without the
advantages of production-line assembly.

The cost of giant mechanical brains under design in 1947 and 1948
is in the neighborhood of $100,000 to $200,000. The main reason for
the reduction from the previous cost is the use of cheaper automatic
memory. As designs improve and charges for research and development are
paid off, the cost should continue to go down.


NEW DEVICES FOR HANDLING INFORMATION

In the laboratories working on new mechanical and electronic brains,
scientists are doing a lot of thinking about new devices for handling
information. Research into devices for storing information shows that
_magnetic wire_ as used in sound recording is a rather good storage
medium.


Magnetic Wire

For example, on a hundredth of an inch of fine steel wire we
can “write” a _magnetized spot_ by means of a small “writing”
_electromagnet_. The electromagnet is simply some copper wire coiled
around some soft iron shaped in a U. When current flows through the
coil, the iron becomes a magnet, and the tips of the U magnetize the
little section of the wire between them. The magnetized spot can be of
two kinds, say north-south or south-north, depending on which way the
current flows. We can “read” this difference by means of another small
“reading” electromagnet. We can erase the spot by means of a stronger
“erasing” magnet that produces a uniform magnetic state throughout the
wire. The difference between north-south and south-north corresponds
to the difference between 1 and 0, or “yes” and “no,” etc., and is
a _unit of information_ (see Chapter 2). Many other variations are
possible. For example, the presence or absence of a magnetized spot may
be the unit of information, or the “writing,” “reading,” and “erasing”
electromagnets all may be the same.

Magnetic wire sound recordings made in the 1890’s are still good.
This fact shows that magnetic wire may be a more permanent medium for
storing information than is paper. Stray magnetic forces are likely
to have no harmful effect on information stored on magnetic wire, for
these forces would not be strong enough or detailed enough to change
greatly the difference between the magnetized spot and its neighboring
neutral area.

A reel of magnetic wire a mile long and ³/₁₀₀₀ of an inch thick costs
about $5. At 80 magnetized spots to the inch, a mile of wire can store
about 5 million units of information. Hence, the cost of storing one
unit of information is about ¹/₁₀₀₀₀ of a cent. The time needed for
changing a magnetized spot from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1 is about ¹/₁₀₀₀₀
of a second.


Magnetic Tape

There is, however, a storage device that may be even more useful, and
this is _magnetic tape_ (see Fig. 1). The usual size of such tape is ¼
inch wide and 2 or 3 thousandths of an inch thick. Magnetic tape may be
made of plastic with magnetic powder all through it, or it may be of
paper coated with magnetic powder, or it may be of stainless steel or
a magnetic alloy, or it may be of brass or a nonmagnetic alloy coated
with a magnetic plating.

Magnetic tape has the added advantage that from 4 to 20 channels across
the tape can be filled with magnetized spots, and the cost then becomes
about ¹/₁₀₀₀₀₀ of a cent per spot. It seems possible that 1000 units
of information can be stored in a quarter of a square inch of magnetic
tape. This means that more than 1 million units of information can be
stored in a cubic inch of space filled with magnetic tape, and about 2
billion units of information in a cubic foot, except that some of the
space should be allotted to the reels and other equipment that hold
the tape (see Fig. 2). This is closer packing than printed information
in the telephone book, and yet with magnetic tape we can get to the
information automatically.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Magnetic tape.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Tape reels.]

Think of the enormous files in libraries, government, and business.
Think of the problems of space and cost and access which these files
imply. We can then see that this new development may well be of
extraordinary importance.


Mercury Tanks

[Illustration: FIG. 3. Mercury tank.]

Scientists are investigating other storage devices having still more
remarkable properties, but these have the disadvantage that, when the
power goes off, the information vanishes. One of these new storage
devices is called a _mercury tank_ (see Fig. 3). It consists mainly
of a section of iron or steel pipe filled with mercury. At each end
of this pipe, touching the mercury, is a thin slab of a crystal of
_quartz_. Quartz, which is a common stone, and which nearly all sand
is made of, changes its shape when pulsed with electricity. We put a
pattern of electrical pulses into the quartz slab at one end of the
mercury tank; for example, we could have the pattern 1101 meaning
“pulse, pulse, no pulse, pulse.” The electrical pulses going into the
quartz slab make the quartz vibrate. Thus ripples are produced in the
mercury, and waves in the pattern 1101 meaning “wave, wave, no wave,
wave” travel down the tank and strike the quartz slab at the far end.
The quartz slab there changes its shape in the rhythm 1101, and it
converts the waves back into electrical pulses in the same pattern.
Then we take the pulses out of the far end along a wire, make them
stronger again with an amplifier, give them the right form again, and
feed them back into the front end of the mercury tank. The mercury tank
is a clever use of the principle of an _echo_, as when you call across
a valley and the rocks answer you back. We can store a pattern of 400
pulses (each a unit of information, a 1 or a 0, and each a millionth
of a second in duration), in a mercury tank about 20 inches long. A
mercury tank and an echo are examples of _delay lines_—“lines” along
which waves are “delayed.”


Electrostatic Storage Tube

Another of the memory devices being developed is called an
_electrostatic storage tube_ (see Fig. 4). This is a big electronic
tube with a _screen_ across one end. The screen may be of two layers:
one of copper, which conducts electricity, and one of _mica_, a
material that does not. In the other end of the tube is a _beam_ of
electrons, which we can turn on and off and shoot at any of 2 or 3
thousand specific points or _spots_ on the screen.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. Electrostatic storage tube.]

There are two sizes of _electric charge_ or quantity of electrons; we
can call these 1 and 0. In about a millionth of a second, we can put
either size of charge on one of the spots of the screen. With other
circuits we can keep it there as long as we want, if the power does
not flicker off. We can “remember” perhaps 2 or 3 thousand units of
information in one of these electronic tubes. We can read, write, or
erase any unit of information in a few millionths of a second.

Neither the mercury tank nor the electrostatic storage tube had, by the
end of 1947, been put into a working mechanical brain. But there is
good reason to believe that they will be successful devices and will
open up a new era of speed in storing and referring to information.
In fact, several laboratories are developing electronic calculating
circuits using these devices which will perform up to 100,000 additions
a second or 10,000 multiplications a second. Our minds certainly
stagger at the thought of such speeds.


NEW OPERATIONS

Many kinds of combining operations have already been built into one or
more mechanical brains. The operations may be arithmetical: addition,
subtraction, multiplication, division, looking up numbers in tables,
etc. Or the operations may be logical: comparing, selecting, checking,
etc. Additional logical operations will be built into some of the
mechanical brains now being constructed: sorting, collating, matching,
merging, etc.


NEW IDEAS IN PROGRAMMING

_Programming_—the way to give instructions to machines—is also being
studied in the laboratories. Several new ideas of importance have
developed as a result.

One idea is that the machine should be able to store its instructions
or _program_ or _routine_ in its memory in just the same physical ways
as it stores numbers. There is basically no reason why numbers only
should be stored in some registers, and instructions only stored in
other registers.

Another idea is that the machine should have in its permanent memory
any subroutine it may need. For example, a subroutine should always be
available in the machine for finding _square root_. At any time when a
square root was needed, we would only have to call on the machine for
the subroutine of square root. The machine would then consult the right
part of its memory and carry out the subroutine for square root.

A third idea, and one of the most interesting, is that the machine
should be able to compute its own instructions. For example, consider a
program for finding the product of two _matrices_ (see Supplement 2),
each of 100 terms in an array of 10 columns and 10 rows, resulting in a
new _matrix_ of 100 terms. The whole program can be made to consist of
about 50 orders. Only one of them is “multiply,” and only one of them
is “add”; the other orders consist of how to choose expressions to be
multiplied or added, etc.

Such problems as these are often fascinating to mathematicians, who
love to play with the intricate ideas needed.


NEW IDEAS IN RELIABILITY

Reliability has a number of aspects:

    1. No wrong results allowed out of the machine.

    2. Few failures.

    3. Rapid location of failures.

    4. Quick repair or replacement of parts that fail.

    5. Easy maintenance.

    6. Unattended operation overnight.

For example, Bell Laboratories proved that mechanical brains can be
built so that no wrong results are allowed to come out. In other words,
the machine checks itself all the time as it goes along and stops at
once if the check shows that something is wrong. This is likely to be a
standard feature of new automatic thinking machinery.

The frequency of failures in the machinery being designed in the
laboratories may be of the order of one or two mechanical failures
a week. For any type of failure an alarm circuit and trouble lights
will show what part of the machine needs attention. Plug-in parts for
replacement are already in use in at least two of the four mechanical
brains described and should be available in all the new machines. It is
possible to build a machine that will automatically change from failing
equipment to properly functioning equipment. For some years though,
this may be too expensive to be reasonable.

The use of magnetic tape for storage reduces greatly the number of
parts and so increases reliability. For example, instead of 18,000
electronic tubes in an electronic brain, there may be less than 3000.

A final degree of reliability is gained when most of the time the
machine operates unattended. Then, there is no human operator standing
by who may fail to do the correct thing at the moment when the machine
needs some attention. In fact, the motto for the room housing a
mechanical brain should become, “Don’t think; let the machine do it
for you.” Unattended operation from the end of one working day to
the beginning of the next, with the machine changing itself from one
problem to another problem, has already been proved possible on the
Bell Laboratories machine.


AUXILIARY DEVICES

In order to use a mechanical brain, we have to give it and take from it
language that it understands, _machine language_. A mechanical brain
that can do 10,000 additions a second can very easily finish almost
all its work at once. How can we, slow as we are, keep our friend,
the giant brain, busy? We have found so far several answers to this
question, none of them yet very good.

Devices for preparing input will be very important. For each brain, we
shall need a great many of these devices. For, at best, we type at a
rate, say, of 4 characters a second, selecting any one of some 38 keys,
each of which is equivalent to about 6 units of information. This is
about 800 units of information per second. The machine, however, is
likely to be able to gulp information from its input mechanism at the
amazing rate of 60,000 units of information per second, equal to 75
people typing with no mistakes and no resting. Fortunately, at least
some of the time the machine will be busy computing!

For an input-preparation device, we may get something that can be
fastened to an ordinary typewriter and that will produce magnetic
tape agreeing with what is printed by the typewriter. Since the input
information must be carefully verified, we shall need a second magnetic
tape device such as exists for paper tape on the Bell Laboratories
machine: the _processor_. The processor takes two hand-prepared tapes,
compares them, reports any differences, and produces a third tape. The
third tape copies the two original tapes if they agree, and it receives
corrected information as furnished by a girl at a keyboard if the two
original tapes disagree.

For information already on punch cards, we need an input device that
will read punch cards and write on magnetic tape. Where information is
on punched paper tape, we need a machine that will read punched paper
tape and write on magnetic tape.

Problem data, tables of numbers, and routine instructions will go
into the mechanical brain. They will all be prepared on regular input
devices. The machine will accept information in the form in which it is
most convenient for you and me to prepare it. Then, the machine will
be instructed to change the information into the form with which it is
most convenient for the machine to operate.

Many output devices will also be needed, since the machine will be able
to produce information very swiftly. These output devices might be
cabled to the machine. A kind of traffic control system would govern
them. Each will have a magnetic tape that will be loaded up swiftly
with information. Then the output device will unload its information
more slowly, in any form that we may desire: printing, graphs, film,
punch cards, or punched paper tape.

The machine is likely to be able to put out information on magnetic
tape at the same high speed of 60,000 units of information per
second or 10,000 characters per second. But the best printing speed
of an electric typewriter is about 10 or 12 characters a second.
Card-punching speed is about 130 characters a second. Punch-card
tabulator speed can reach a maximum of about 200 characters a second.
Thus we see that here, too, we may be snowed under with the information
that the giant brain puts out, if we fail to ask the giant only for
what we really want.


MECHANICAL BRAINS UNDER CONSTRUCTION

This chapter would not be complete without mention of the great
mechanical brains that were actually under construction at the end of
1947. In power they are intermediate between the machinery now being
designed, described in this chapter, and the earlier machines described
in the previous chapters of this book.

The mechanical brains under construction on December 31, 1947, were:

    Harvard’s Sequence-Controlled Relay Calculator _Mark
      II_, constructed at the Harvard Computation
      Laboratory, tested there July 1947 to January 1948,
      and delivered to the Naval Proving Ground, Dahlgren,
      Va., in 1948.

    The _IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic
      Calculator_, constructed in the IBM laboratories,
      Endicott, N. Y., and installed in 1947 at the office
      of International Business Machines, 590 Madison Ave.,
      New York, N. Y.

    Moore School of Electrical Engineering’s _EDVAC_
      (Electronic Digital Variable Automatic Computer)
      being constructed partly at Moore School and partly
      elsewhere, and to be delivered to the Ballistic
      Research Laboratories, Aberdeen, Md.

    Harvard’s Sequence-Controlled Electronic Calculator
      _Mark III_, being constructed at the Harvard
      Computation Laboratory, and to be delivered to the
      Naval Proving Ground, Dahlgren, Va.

We shall cover briefly (and perhaps a little technically) some of the
main features of the first two of these machines; for, during 1948,
they began to do problems. The other two had not been finished by
the end of 1948 and so would be difficult to describe correctly, for
mechanical brains _grow_, and design changes go on until they are
finished—and even afterwards.

Some information about these machines can be obtained from the
organizations referred to above and from reports that should appear
from time to time in some of the journals mentioned in Supplement
3. There is also a regular section entitled “Automatic Computing
Machinery” in the quarterly _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
Computation_, where it is likely that current information may be found.


Harvard’s Mark II

The Harvard Sequence-Controlled Calculator Mark II began to do problems
under test during July 1947. This machine is at least twelve times as
powerful as Mark I (see Chapter 6) and was constructed entirely by
the Harvard Computation Laboratory. The machine contains about 13,000
relays of a new type that will operate reliably within ¹/₁₀₀ of a
second.

Numbers in the machine are regularly of 10 decimal digits between
1.000,000,000 and 9.999,999,999, inclusive, multiplied by a power of 10
between 1,000,000,000,000,000 and 0.000,000,000,000,001, inclusive.

For storage of numbers, the machine has 100 relay registers totaling
about 1200 decimal digits. Also, it can consult any one of 8 tape feeds
for numbers and any one of 4 tape feeds for instructions. Effectively,
the machine can read one number and one instruction from paper tape in
¹/₃₀ of a second.

The machine performs all arithmetical and most logical operations.
In every second it can carry out 4 multiplications, 8 additions (or
subtractions), and 12 transfers. Division is performed by rapid
approximation using the other operations.

In each second the machine can perform 30 instructions. An instruction
is expressed by 6 digits between 0 and 7 which you can select and, in
effect, by 3 more digits fixed by the time (within the second) when the
machine reads the instruction. For example, in the 9th instruction of
the 30 instructions in each second, we can specify a multiplicand. But,
if we do not want to multiply right then—a rare event if we are coding
wisely—we leave the 9th instruction empty. The machine may operate as a
whole, attending to one problem; or the machine may be separated into
halves, and each half will attend to its own problem.


The IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic Calculator

The IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic Calculator was announced publicly
on January 27, 1948, after some months of trial running. It is a large
and powerful mechanical brain, and it is the intention of International
Business Machines to devote it to solving scientific problems. The
staff of the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory in New York will be
mainly in charge of the machine.

The machine contains about 12,500 electronic tubes and about 21,500
relays. Numbers in the machine are regularly of either 14 or 19
decimal digits. Instructions are expressed as numbers. For storage of
information, the machine has a capacity of 8 registers totaling 160
decimal digits of very rapid memory in electronic tubes. Also, it has
about 150 registers totaling 3000 decimal digits of less rapid memory
in relays. Also, it can consult any one of 66 paper tape feeds; each
row on a paper tape can hold up to 78 punched holes or 19 decimal
digits, and the machine can consult 25 rows on one tape in one second.
These paper tapes together give the machine about 400,000 decimal
digits of memory.

For arithmetical and logical operations, the machine has an
arithmetical unit using electronic tubes. This unit can carry out about
50 multiplications or about 250 additions per second, including the
transfers of numbers. In each second the machine can read and perform
50 instructions, and each instruction consists, usually, of getting
two numbers out of two relay registers, performing an operation, and
putting the result into a third relay register.


Eckert-Mauchly’s Binac

As this book went to press, another mechanical brain, the Electronic
Binary Automatic Computer, or BINAC, was announced on August 22,
1949. This machine was constructed by the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation, Philadelphia, Pa., for Northrop Aircraft, Inc., Hawthorne,
Calif.

This machine has some remarkable properties. It does addition or
subtraction at the rate of 3500 per second. It does multiplication or
division at the rate of 1000 per second. The input is from a keyboard
or magnetic tape; the output is to magnetic tape or an electric
typewriter. Binac has 512 registers of very rapid memory in mercury
tanks, and each register holds 30 binary digits. The machine actually
is a pair of twins: the storage, the computing element, and the control
are double, and each twin runs in step with the other and checks
every operation of the other. In tests in July the machine ran over
10 consecutive hours with no error. Each twin has only 700 electronic
tubes. Binac handles all numbers in binary notation, except that the
keyboard and the typewriter express numbers in _octal notation_ (see
Supplement 2). Finally, Binac is only 5 feet high, 4 feet long, and one
foot wide.




Chapter 11

THE FUTURE:

MACHINES THAT THINK, AND WHAT THEY MIGHT DO FOR MEN


The pen is mightier than the sword, it is often said. And if this is
true, then the pen with a motor may be mightier than the sword with a
motor.

In the Middle Ages, there were few kinds of weapons, and it was easy
for a man to protect himself against most of them by wearing armor.
As gunpowder came into use, a man could no longer carry the weight of
armor that would protect him, and so armor was given up. But in 1917,
armor, equipped with a motor and carrying the man and his weapons, came
back into service—as the tank.

In much the same way, in the Middle Ages, there were few books, and it
was easy for a man to handle nearly all the information that was in
books. As the printing press came into use, man’s brain could no longer
handle all recorded information, and the effort to do so was given
up. But in 1944, a brain to handle information, equipped with a motor
and supporting the man and his reasoning, came into existence—as the
sequence-controlled calculator.

In previous chapters we have examined some of the giant mechanical
brains that have been finished; we have also considered the design
of such machines. Now in this chapter we shall discuss the future
significance of machines that think, of motorized information. We shall
discuss what we can foresee if we look with imagination into the future.

There are two questions we need to ask: What types of machines that
think can we foresee? What types of problems to be solved by these
machines can we foresee?


FUTURE TYPES OF MACHINES THAT THINK

The machines that already exist show that some processes of thinking
can already be performed very quickly:

    Calculating: adding, subtracting,...
    Reasoning: comparing, selecting,...
    Referring: looking up information in lists,...

We can expect other processes of thinking to come up to high speed
through the further development of thinking machines.


Automatic Address Book

Nowadays when we wish to send out announcements of an event, like going
to South America for a year, we may copy the addresses of our friends
onto the envelopes by hand. In the future, we can see our address book
as a spool of magnetic tape. When we wish to send out announcements,
we put a stack of blank envelopes into the machine that will read the
magnetic tape, and we press a button. Out will come the envelopes
addressed.

If we wish to select only those friends of ours whose last names we put
down on a list, we can write the list on another magnetic tape, place
it also in the machine, and set a few switches. Then the machine will
read the names on the list, find their addresses in the address-book
tape, and prepare only the envelopes we want. If a friend’s address
changes, we can notify the machine. It will find his old address, erase
it, and enter the new address.


Automatic Library

We can foresee the development of machinery that will make it possible
to consult information in a library automatically. Suppose that you
go into the library of the future and wish to look up ways for making
biscuits. You will be able to dial into the catalogue machine “making
biscuits.” There will be a flutter of movie film in the machine. Soon
it will stop, and, in front of you on the screen, will be projected
the part of the catalogue which shows the names of three or four books
containing recipes for biscuits. If you are satisfied, you will press
a button; a copy of what you saw will be made for you and come out of
the machine.

After further development, all the pages of all books will be available
by machine. Then, when you press the right button, you will be able to
get from the machine a copy of the exact recipe for biscuits that you
choose.

We are not yet at the end of foreseeable development. There will be
a third stage. You will then have in your home an automatic cooking
machine operated by program tapes. You will stock it with various
supplies, and it will put together and cook whatever dishes you desire.
Then, what you will need from the library will be a program or routine
on magnetic tape to control your automatic cook. And the library,
instead of producing a pictorial copy of the recipe for you to read and
apply, will produce a routine on magnetic tape for controlling your
cooking machine so that you will actually get excellent biscuits!

Of course, you may have other kinds of automatic producing machinery in
your home or office. The furnishing of routines to control automatic
machinery will become a business of importance.


Automatic Translator

Another machine that we can foresee would be used for translating from
one language to any other. We can call it an _automatic translator_.
Suppose that you want to say “How much?” in Swedish. You dial into the
machine “How much?” and press the button “Swedish,” and the machine
will promptly write out “Hur mycket?” for you. It also will pronounce
it, if you wish, for there would be little difficulty in recording on
magnetic tape the pronunciation of the word as spoken by a good speaker
of the language. The machine could be set to repeat the pronunciation
several times so that the student could really learn the sound. He
could learn it better, probably, by hearing it and trying to say it
than he could by using any set of written symbols.


Automatic Typist

We now come to a possible machine that uses a new principle. This
principle is that of being able to _recognize_ signs. This machine
would perceive writing on a piece of paper and recognize that all the
_a_’s that appear on the paper are cases of _a_, and that all the _b_’s
that appear on it are instances of _b_, and so forth. The machine could
then control an electric typewriter and copy the marks that it sees.
The first stage of this machine would be one in which only printed
characters of a high degree of likeness could be recognized. In later
stages, handwriting, even rather illegible handwriting, might be
recognizable by the machine. We can call it an _automatic typist_.

The elements of the automatic typist would be the following:

    1. _Phototubes_ (electronic tubes sensitive to
        the brightness of light), which could sense the
        difference between black and white (these already
        exist).

    2. A memory of the shapes of 52 letters, 10 digits,
        and punctuation marks. Fine distinctions would be
        required of this memory in some cases—like the
        difference between the numeral 5 and the capital
        letter S.

    3. A control that would cause the machine to
        _tune_ itself, so that a good matching between
        the marks it observed and the shapes it remembered
        would be reached.

    4. A _triggering control_ so that, when the
        machine had reached good enough matching between
        its observations and its memory, the machine would
        proceed to identify the marks, read them, and
        transfer them.

    5. An electric typewriter, which would respond to
        the transferred instructions. (This also already
        exists.)

This machine is perhaps not so farfetched as it might seem. During
World War II, gun-aiming equipment using the new technique _radar_
reached a high stage of development. Many shots that disabled and sank
enemy ships were fired in total darkness by radar-controlled guns.
On the glowing screen in the control room, there were two spots, one
that marked the target and one that reported the point at which the
gun was aimed. These two spots could be brought almost automatically
into agreement. In the same way, a report from a phototube telling
the shape of an observed mark and a report from the memory of the
machine telling the shape of a similar mark could be compared by the
machine for likeness and, if judged enough alike, could be approved as
identical.

Even the phrase “enough alike” can be applied by a machine. During
World War II, tremendous advances were made in machinery for
deciphering enemy messages. Machines observed various features and
patterns in enemy messages, swiftly counted the frequency of these
features, and carried out statistical tests. Then the machines selected
those few cases in which the patterns showed meaning instead of
randomness.

A machine like the automatic typist, if made flexible enough, would
be, of course, extremely useful. A great load of dull office work is
now being thrown on clerks whose task is to translate from writing and
typing into languages that machines can read, such as punch cards.
At the present time, if punch-card machines are widely used in a big
company, the company must employ large numbers of girls whose sole
duty is to read papers and punch up cards. A still bigger chore is the
work of typists in all kinds of businesses whose main duty is to read
handwriting, etc., and then copy the words on a typewriter.

[Illustration: Each square in the grill is watched by a phototube.

FIG. 1. Scheme for distinguishing _A_ and _H_ by 15
phototubes.]

Research has already begun on various features of the automatic typist
because of its obvious labor-saving value. For example, many patents
have been issued on schemes for dividing the area occupied by a letter
or a digit into an array of spots, with a battery of phototubes
each watching a spot. The reports from the phototubes together will
distinguish the letter or digit. For example, if we consider _A_ and
_H_ placed in a grill of fifteen spots, 5 long by 3 wide (see Fig.
1), then the phototubes can distinguish between _A_ and _H_ by sensing
black or white in the spot in the middle of the top row. When we
consider how easily and swiftly a human being does this, we can once
more marvel at the recognizing machine we all carry around with us in
our heads.


Automatic Stenographer

Another development that we can foresee is one that we can call the
_automatic stenographer_. This is a machine that will listen to sounds
and write them down in properly spelled English words. The elements of
this machine can be outlined:

        1. Microphones, which can sense spoken sounds (these
            already exist).

        2. A memory storing the 40 (more or less) phonetic
            units or sounds that make up English, such as the
            23 consonant sounds,

        _p_    _b_    _l_    _ng_
        _f_    _v_    _m_    _th_
        _t_    _d_    _n_    _r_
        _s_    _z_    _h_    _y_
        _k_    _g_           _w_
        _ch_   _j_
        _sh_   _zh_ (heard in “pleasure”)

    and the 17 vowel sounds,

              LONG            SHORT           OTHER
        _A_  (“ate”)    _a_  (“cat”)    _ar_ (“are”)
        _E_  (“eat”)    _e_  (“end”)    _aw_ (“awe”)
        _I_  (“isle”)   _i_  (“in”)     _er_ (“err”)
        _O_  (“owe”)    _o_  (“on”)     _ow_ (“owl”)
        _U_  (“cute”)   _u_  (“up”)     _oi_ (“oil”)
        _OO_ (“roof”)   _oo_ (“book”)

        3. A collection of the rules of spelling in English,
            containing many statements like

        The sound _b_ is always spelled _b_

        The sound _sh_ may be spelled _sh_ (ship), _s_ (sugar),
            _ti_ (station), _ci_ (physician), _ce_ (ocean) or
            _tu_ (picture) and other statements based on context,
            word lists, derivation, etc. These are the statements
            by means of which a good English speller knows how to
            spell even words that he hears for the first time.

        4. A triggering control so that, when the machine
            reaches good enough matching between its
            observations of sounds, its memory of sounds, and
            its knowledge of spelling rules, the machine will
            identify groups of sounds as words, determine their
            spelling, and report the letters determined.

        5. An electric typewriter, which would type the
            reported letters.

With this type of machine, you would dictate your letters into a
machine (now existing) that would record your voice. Then the record
would be placed on the automatic stenographer, and out would come your
letters written and spaced as they should be.


Automatic Recognizer

We can foresee a recognizing machine with very general powers. Suppose
that we call it an _automatic recognizer_ (see Fig. 2). It will have
the following elements:

    1. _Input._ This element will consist of a set
        of observing instruments, capable of perceiving
        sights, sounds, etc. There will be ways of
        positioning or _tuning_ these instruments.

    2. _Memory._ This element will store knowledge.
        It may store the patterns of observations that we
        are interested in; or it may store general rules on
        how to find patterns of observations that we will
        be interested in. It will contain knowledge about
        acceptable groups of patterns, about actions to be
        performed in response to patterns, etc.

    3. _Program 1._ The element “Program 1” performs
        a set of standard instructions. Under these
        instructions, the machine:

    Compares group after group of observations with the
        information in the memory.

    Compares these groups with patterns furnished, or seeks
        to organize the observations into patterns.

    Counts cases and tests frequencies.

    Finds out how much matching with patterns there is.

    Tunes the observing instruments in ways to increase
        matching.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. Scheme of an automatic recognizer.]

    4. _Program 2._ The element “Program 2” performs
        another set of standard instructions. Under these
        instructions, the machine, if it is tuned well,
        matches sets of observations one after another with
        the patterns and so reads them.

    5. _Triggering Control._ This element shifts the
        control of the machine from Program 1 to Program
        2. It does this when the machine reaches “good
        matching.” We shall set the meaning of this into
        the machine in much the same way as we set “warm”
        into a thermostat.

    6. _Output._ This element performs any action
        that we want, depending on recognized patterns read
        and any other knowledge or instructions stored in
        the memory.

The automatic recognizer will be capable of extraordinary tasks. With
microphones and a large memory, this type of machine would be able to
hear a foreign language spoken and translate it into spoken or written
English. With phototubes and with an expanded filtering and decoding
capacity as in deciphering machines, the automatic recognizer should be
able to read a dead language, even those (such as Minoan or Etruscan)
that have so far resisted efforts to read it. The machine would derive
rules for the translation of the language and translate any sample.

An automatic recognizer could perhaps be equipped with many sensitive,
tiny observing instruments that could be placed around or in the brain
and nervous systems of animals. Then the machine might enable us to
find out what activity in the nervous system corresponds with what
activity in the animal.


TYPES OF PROBLEMS THAT MACHINES WILL SOLVE IN THE FUTURE

We turn now to the second question regarding the future of machines
that think: What types of problems can we foresee as solved by these
machines?


Problems of Control

Probably the foremost problem which machines that think can solve is
automatic control over all sorts of other machines. This involves
controlling a machine that is running so that it will do the right
thing at the right time in response to information. For example,
suppose that you are mowing a lawn with a mowing machine. You watch
the preceding strip so as to stay next to it. You watch the ends of
the strips, where you turn around. If a stick is caught in the cutting
blade, you stop and take it out. Now it is entirely possible to put
devices on the mowing machine so that all these things will be taken
care of automatically. In fact, in the case of plowing a large field,
a tractor-plow can be equipped with a device that guides it next to
the preceding furrow. Thus, once the first furrow around the edge has
been made, riderless tractors will plow a whole field and stop in the
middle.

For another example, take a gas furnace for heating steam to keep a
house warm. Such a furnace has automatic controls, which respond to the
following information whenever reported:

    House too warm.
    House not warm enough.
    Too much steam pressure.
    Not enough water in boiler.
    Gas flame not lit.
    Daytime.
    Nighttime.

In fact, your own meaning of “warm” can be put into the control system:
you set the dial on your thermostat at the temperature that “warm” is
to be for you.

In the future many kinds of automatic control will be common. We shall
have automatic pilots for flying and landing airplanes. We shall
have automatic missiles for destructive purposes, such as bombing
and killing, and for constructive purposes, such as delivering mail
and fast freight. An article in the magazine _Fortune_ for November
1946 described the automatic factory (see Supplement 3). This is a
factory in which there would be automatic arms for holding stuff being
manufactured, and automatic feed lines for supplying material just
where it is needed. All this factory would be controlled by machines
that handle information automatically and produce actions that respond
to information.

This prospect fills us with concern as well as with amazement. How
shall we control these automatic machines, these robots, these
Frankensteins? What will there be left for us to do to earn our living?
But more of this in the next chapter.


Problems of Science

Other problems for which we can foresee the use of machines that think
are the understanding, and later the controlling, of nature. One of
these problems is weather forecasting and weather control.


The Weather Brain

We can imagine the following type of machine—a _weather brain_. A
thousand weather observatories all over the country observe the weather
at 8 A.M. The observations are fed automatically through a countrywide
network of communication lines into a central station. Here a giant
machine, containing a great deal of scientific knowledge about the
weather, takes in all the data reported to it. At 8:15 the weather
brain starts to calculate; in half an hour it has finished, having
produced an excellent forecast of the weather for the whole country.
Then it proceeds to transmit its forecast all over the country. By 8:50
every weather station, newspaper, radio station, and airport in the
country has the details. In October 1945, Dr. V. K. Zworykin of the
Princeton Laboratories of the Radio Corporation of America proposed
solving the problem of weather forecasting in this way by a giant brain.

The weather brain will have a second stage of application. From time to
time and here and there, the weather is unstable: it can be triggered
to behave in one way or another. For example, recently, pellets of
_frozen carbon dioxide_—often called Dry Ice—have been dropped from
planes and have caused rain. In fact, a few pounds of Dry Ice have
apparently caused several hundred tons of rain or snow. In similar
ways, we may, for example, turn away a hail storm so that hail will
fall over a barren mountain instead of over a farming valley and
thus protect crops. Or we may dispel conditions that would lead to a
tornado, thus avoiding its damage. Both these examples involve local
weather disturbances. However, even the greatest weather disturbances,
like hurricanes and blizzards, may eventually be directed to some
extent. Thus the weather may become to some degree subject to man’s
control, and the weather brain will be able to tell men where and when
to take action.


Psychological Testing

Another scientific problem to which new machinery for handling
information applies is the problem of understanding human beings and
their behavior. This increased understanding may lead to much wiser
dealing with human behavior.

For example, consider tests of aptitudes. If you take one of these
tests, you may be asked to mark which word out of five suggested ones
is nearest in meaning to a given word. Or your test may be 40 simple
arithmetical problems to be solved in 25 minutes. Or you may be given
a sheet with 20 circles, and be asked to put 3 dots in the first, 7
dots in the second, 4 dots in the third, 11 dots in the fourth, and
so on, irregularly; you may be given a total of 45 seconds to do this
as well as you can. Now, if a vocational counselor gives you one of
these tests, and if you get 84 out of 100 on it, he needs to know just
what he has measured about you. Also, he needs to know whether he can
reasonably forecast that, as a result of your grade of 84, you will
be good at writing articles, or good at supervising the work of other
people, or good at designing in a machine shop. He needs to know the
records of people with scores of about 84 on this test and to have
evidence supporting his forecasts.

If we wish to make the most use of the tests, we need to carry out a
good deal of statistics, mathematics, and logic. For example, it will
turn out that answers to some questions are much more significant
than answers to others, and so we can greatly improve the quality of
the tests by keeping only the more significant questions. Powerful
machinery for handling calculations will be very useful in the field of
aptitude testing.

But, you may ask, what if the person analyzing your answers has to use
interpretations and judgments? If the judgments and interpretations can
be expressed in words, and if the words can be translated into machine
language, then the machine can carry out the analysis. Usually the
difference between a rule and a judgment is simply this: a rule in a
case in which it is hard to express all the factors being considered is
called a judgment.


Psychological Trainer

It is conceivable that machines that think can eventually be applied
in the actual treatment of mental illness and maladjustment. Consider
what a physician does. In treating a psychiatric case, such as a
_neurosis_, a physician uses words almost entirely. He asks questions.
He listens to the patient’s answers. Each answer takes the physician
nearer and nearer to a diagnosis. By and by the physician knows what
most of the difficulty is. Then he must present his knowledge slowly
to the patient, gradually guiding the patient to understanding. It is
a psychological truth that telling a man in ten minutes what is wrong
with him does not cure him. The physician seeks to free the patient
from the tormenting circles of habit and worry in which he has been
trapped. Often the diagnosis is short and the treatment is long; the
reasons for the neurosis may soon be clear to the physician, but they
may take months to become clear to the patient.

Now let us consider the following kind of machine as an aid to the
physician. We might call this kind of machine a _psychological
trainer_, for in many ways it is like the training machines used in
World War II for training a pilot to fly an airplane. The psychological
trainer would have the following properties:

    1. The machine is able to show sound movies—produce
        pictures and utter words.

    2. It is able to put before the patient: situations,
        problems, questions, experiences, etc.

    3. It is able to take in responses from the patient.

    4. It is able to receive a program of instructions
        from the physician.

    5. Depending on the responses of the patient and on
        the program from the physician, the training
        machine can select more material to put before the
        patient.

    6. The training machine produces a record of what it
        presented and of how the patient responded, so that
        the physician and the patient can study the record
        later.

What sort of films would the machine hold? The machine could be loaded
with a number of films which would help in the particular type of
neurosis from which the patient was suffering.

What sort of responses could the patient make? The patient might have
buttons in front of him which he could press to indicate such answers
as:

    Yes       I don’t know      Repeat
    No        It depends        Go ahead

Also, the patient might hold a device—like a lie detector,
perhaps—which would report his state of tenseness, etc., and so report
what he really felt.

Where would the machine’s questions come from? From one or more
physicians very clever in the treatment of mental illness.

Suppose that the patient is inconsistent in his answers? The machine,
discovering the inconsistencies, could return to the subject and ask
related questions in a different way. As soon as several questions
related to the same point are answered consistently, the machine could
exclude groups of questions that no longer apply and could proceed to
other questions that would still apply.

Patients would vary in their ability to go as fast as the machine
could. So from time to time the machine would ask questions to test
the effect of what it had presented; and, depending on the answers,
the machine would go faster or would bring in additional material to
clarify some point.

This machine might have a few advantages over ordinary treatment. For
example, with the machine, treatment does not depend on the physician’s
making the right answer in a split second, as it may in a personal
interview. Also, the patient might be franker with the machine than
with the physician, for it might be arranged that the patient could
review his record, and then decide whether to confess it to his
physician.

Such a machine would enable physicians to treat many more patients
than they now can. In fact, it is estimated that nearly 50 per cent of
persons who consult physicians are suffering only from mental illness.
Such a machine would therefore be a great help.


Problems of Business

Another large group of problems for which we can foresee the use of
machines that think is found in business and economics.

For example, consider production scheduling in a business or a factory.
The machine takes in a description of each order received by the
business and a description of its relative urgency. The machine knows
(that is, has in its memory) how much of each kind of raw material is
needed to fill the order and what equipment and manpower are needed
to produce it. The machine makes a schedule showing what particular
men and what particular equipment are to be set to work to produce the
order. The machine turns out the best possible production schedule,
showing who should do what when, so that all the orders will be filled
in the best sequence. What is the “best” sequence? We can decide what
we think is the best sequence, and we can set the machine for making
that kind of selection, in the same way as we decide what is “warm” and
set the thermostat to produce it!

On a much larger scale, we can use mechanical brains to study economic
relations in a society. Everything produced in a society is made by
consuming some materials, labor, equipment, and skill. The output
produced by one man or factory or industry becomes the input for
other men, factories, industries. In this way all economic units are
linked together by many different kinds and degrees of dependence. The
situation is, of course, complicated: it changes as time goes on and
as people want different things produced. Economists have already set
up simple models of economic societies and have studied them. But with
machines that think, it will be possible to set up and study far more
complicated models—models that are very much like the society we live
in. We can then answer questions of economics by calculation instead of
by arguments and counting noses. We shall be able to solve definitely
such problems as: “How will a rise in the price of steel affect the
farming industry?” “How much money must be paid out as wages and
salaries so that consumer purchasing power will buy back what industry
produces?”


Machines and the Individual

What about the ordinary everyday effects of these machines upon you
and me as an individual? We can see that the new machinery will apply
on a small scale even to us. Small machines using a few electronic
tubes—much like a radio set, for example—and containing spools of
magnetic wire or magnetic tape will doubtless be available to us. We
shall be able to use them to keep addresses and telephone numbers, to
figure out the income tax we should pay, to help us keep accounts and
make ends meet, to remember many things we need to know, and perhaps
even to give us more information. For there are a great many things
that all of us could do much better if we could only apply what the
wisest of us knows.

We can even imagine what new machinery for handling information may
some day become: a small pocket instrument that we carry around with
us, talking to it whenever we need to, and either storing information
in it or receiving information from it. Thus the brain with a motor
will guide and advise the man just as the armor with a motor carries
and protects him.




Chapter 12

SOCIAL CONTROL:

MACHINES THAT THINK AND HOW SOCIETY MAY CONTROL THEM


It is often easier for men to create a device than to guide it well
afterwards: it is often easier for a scientist to study his science
than to study the results for good or evil that his discoveries may
lead to. But it is not right nor proper for a scientist, a man who is
loyal to truth as an ideal, to have no regard for what his discoveries
may lead to.

This principle is now being widely recognized. Many scientists
today—both as individuals and as groups, and especially the atomic
scientists—are considering the results of their scientific discoveries;
and they are sharing in the effort to render those results truly useful
to humanity.

It would be easy to leave out of this book any discussion of how
machines that think may be controlled, any consideration of how they
may be made truly useful to humanity. But that would be hardly right
or proper. In concluding a book such as this one, that touches on many
aspects of machines that think, we need to consider what can and should
be done to make such machines of true benefit to all of humanity.

So, we come to the most important of all our questions: What sort of
control over machines that think do we need in human society?


MACHINE THAT BOTH THINKS AND ACTS

From a narrow point of view, a machine that only thinks produces
only information. It takes in information in one state, and it puts
out information in another state. From this viewpoint, information
in itself is harmless; it is just an arrangement of marks; and
accordingly, a machine that thinks is harmless, and no control is
necessary.

Although it is true that the information produced only becomes good or
evil after other machinery or human beings act on the information, in
reality a machine with the power to produce information is constructed
only for the reason of its use. We want to know what such machines can
tell us only because we can then proceed to act much more efficiently
than before. For example, a guided missile needs a mechanical brain
only because then it can reach its target. In all cases mechanical
brains are inseparable from their uses.

For the purposes of this chapter, the narrow view will be rejected
because it dodges the issue. We shall be much concerned with the
combination of a machine that thinks with another machine that acts;
and we shall often call this combination the _robot machine_.


READING THIS CHAPTER

Now, before launching further into the discussion, we need to say
that the conclusions suggested in this chapter are not final. Even
if they are expressed a little positively in places, they are
nevertheless subject to change as more information is discovered and
as the appraisal of information changes with time. Also, almost any
conclusions about social control—including, certainly, the conclusions
in this chapter—are subject to controversy. But controversy is good:
it leads to thought. The more minds that go to work on solving the
problem of social control over robot machines and other products of
the new technology—which is rushing upon us from the discoveries of
the scientists—the better off we all will be. If, while stimulating
disagreement, the ideas expressed in this chapter should succeed in
stimulating thought and deliberation, the purpose of this chapter will
be well fulfilled.

Up to this point in this book, the emphasis has been on possibilities
of benefits to humanity that may arise from machines that think. In
this chapter, devoted as it is to the subject of control, the emphasis
is on possibilities for harm. Both possibilities are valid, and the
happening of either depends upon the actions of men. In much the same
way, atomic energy is a great possibility for benefit and for harm. It
is the nature of control to put a fence around danger; and so it is
natural in this chapter that the weight of attention should shift to
the dangerous aspects of machines that think.

Perhaps a reader may feel that a chapter of this kind is rather out of
place in a book, such as this one, that seeks to be scientific. If so,
he is reminded that, in accordance with the general suggestions for
reading this book stated in the preface, he should omit this chapter.


FRANKENSTEIN

Perhaps the first study of the consequences of a machine that thinks is
a prophetic novel called _Frankenstein_, written more than a hundred
years ago, in 1818. The author, then only 21 years old, was Mary W.
Godwin, who became the wife of the poet Percy Bysshe Shelley.

According to the story, a young Swiss, an ardent student of physiology
and chemistry, Victor Frankenstein, finds the secret of life. He makes
an extremely ugly, clever, and powerful monster, with human desires.
Frankenstein promptly flees from his laboratory and handiwork. The
monster, after seeking under great hardships for a year or two to earn
fair treatment among men, finds himself continually attacked and harmed
on account of his ugliness, and he becomes embittered. He begins to
search for his creator for either revenge or a bargain. When they meet:

    “I expected this reception,” said the daemon.

    “All men hate the wretched; how then must I be hated
    who am miserable beyond all living things! Yet you my
    creator detest and spurn me, thy creature, to whom thou
    art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation
    of one of us. You purpose to kill me. How dare you
    sport thus with life? Do your duty towards me, and I
    will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind. If
    you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them
    and you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the
    maw of death, until it be satiated with the blood of
    your remaining friends.”

Frankenstein starts to comply with the main condition, which is to
make a mate for the monster; but Frankenstein cannot bring himself
to do it. So the monster causes the death one after another of all
Frankenstein’s family and closest friends; and the tale finally ends
with the death of Frankenstein and the disappearance of the monster.

As the dictionary says about Frankenstein, “The name has become a
synonym for one destroyed by his own works.”


ROSSUM’S UNIVERSAL ROBOTS

Perhaps the next study of the consequences of a machine that thinks
is a remarkable play called _R.U.R._ (for Rossum’s Universal Robots),
first produced in Prague in 1921. Karel Čapek, the Czech dramatist who
wrote it, was then only 31. The word “robot” comes from the Czech word
“robota,” meaning compulsory service.

According to the play, Rossum the elder, a scientist, discovered a
“method of organizing living matter” that was “more simple, flexible,
and rapid” than the method used by nature. Rossum the younger, an
engineer, founded a factory for the mass production of artificial
workmen, robots. They had the form of human beings, intelligence,
memory, and strength; but they were without feelings.

In the first act, the factory under Harry Domin, General Manager, is
busy supplying robots to purchasers all over the world—for work, for
fighting, for any purpose at all, to anyone who could pay for them.
Domin declares:

    “... in ten years, Rossum’s Universal Robots will
    produce so much corn, so much cloth, so much everything
    that things will be practically without price. There
    will be no poverty. All work will be done by living
    machines. Everybody will be free from worry and
    liberated from the degradation of labor. Everybody will
    live only to perfect himself.... It’s bound to happen.”

In the second act, ten years later, it turns out that Domin and the
others in charge of the factory have been making some robots with
additional human characteristics, such as the capacity to feel pain.
The newer types of robots, however, have united all the robots against
man, for the robots declare that they are “more highly developed than
man, stronger, and more intelligent, and man is their parasite.”

In the last act, the robots conquer and slay all men except one—an
architect, Alquist, who in the epilogue provides a final quirk to the
plot.


FACT AND FANCY

Now what is fact and what is fancy in these two warnings given to us a
hundred years apart?

Of course, it is very doubtful that a Frankenstein monster or a Rossum
robot will soon be constructed with nerves, flesh, and blood like an
animal body. But we know that many types of robot machines can even now
be constructed out of hardware—wheels, motors, wires, electronic tubes,
etc. They can handle many kinds of information and are able to perform
many kinds of actions, and they are stronger and swifter than man.

Of course, it is doubtful that the robot machines, by themselves and
of their own “free will,” will be dangerous to human beings. But as
soon as antisocial human beings have access to the controls over robot
machines, the danger to society becomes great. We want to escape that
danger.


Escape from Danger

A natural longing of many of us is to escape to an earlier, simpler
life on this earth. Victor Frankenstein longed to undo the past. He
said:

    “Learn from me, if not by my precepts, at least by my
    example, how dangerous is the acquirement of knowledge,
    and how much happier that man is who believes his
    native town to be the world, than he who aspires to
    become greater than his nature will allow.”

Any sort of return to the past is, of course, impossible. It is
doubtful that men could, even if they wanted to, stop the great flood
of technical knowledge that science is now producing. We all must
now face the fact that the kind of world we used to live in, even so
recently as 1939, is gone. There now exist weapons and machines so
powerful and dangerous in the wrong hands that in a day or two most of
the people of the earth could be put to death. Giant brains are closely
related to at least two of these weapons: scientists have already used
mechanical brains for solving problems about atomic explosives and
guided missiles. In addition, thinking mechanisms designed for the
automatic control of gunfire were an important part of the winning of
World War II. They will be a still more important part of the fighting
of any future war.

Nor can we escape to another part of the earth which the new weapons
will not reach. At 300 miles an hour, any spot on earth can be reached
from any other in less than 48 hours. A modern plane exceeds this
speed; a rocket or guided missile doubles or trebles it.

Nor can we trust that some kind of good luck will pull us through and
help men to escape the consequences of what men do. Both Frankenstein
and Domin reaped in full the consequences of what they did. The history
of life on this earth that is recorded in the rocks is full of evidence
of races of living things that have populated the earth for a time
and then become extinct, such as the dinosaurs. In that long history,
rarely does a race survive. In our own day, insects and fungi rather
than men have shown fitness to survive and spread over the earth:
witness the blight that destroyed the chestnut trees of North America,
in spite of the best efforts of scientists to stop it.

There seems to be no kind of escape possible. It is necessary to
grapple with the problem: How can we be safe against the threat of
physical harm from robot machines?


UNEMPLOYMENT

The other chief threat from robot machines is against our economic
life. Harry Domin, in _R.U.R._, you remember, prophesied: “All work
will be done by living machines.” As an example, in the magazine
_Modern Industry_ for Feb. 15, 1947, appeared a picture of a machine
for selling books, and under the picture were the words:

    _Another new product in robot salesmen_—Latest in
    the parade of mechanical vending machines is this book
    salesman.... It is designed for use in hospitals, rail
    terminals, and stores. It offers 15 different titles,
    selected manually, and obtained by dropping quarter in
    slot. Cabinet stores 96 books.

Can you feel the breath of the robot salesman, workman, engineer,—--,
on the back of your neck?

At the moment when we combine automatic producing machinery and
automatic controlling machinery, we get a vast saving in labor and
a great increase in technological unemployment. In extreme cases,
perhaps, the effect of robot machines will be the disappearance of men
from a factory. Such a factory will be like a modern power plant that
turns a waterfall into electricity: once the machinery is installed,
only one watchman is ordinarily needed. But, in most cases, this will
be the effect: in a great number of factories, mines, farms, etc., the
labor force needed will be cut by a great proportion. The effect is not
different in quality, because the new development is robot machinery;
but the amount of technological unemployment coming from robot machines
is likely to be considerably greater than previously.

The robot machine raises the two questions that hang like swords over
a great many of us these days. The first one is for any employee: What
shall I do when a robot machine renders worthless all the skill I have
spent years in developing? The second question is for any businessman:
How shall I sell what I make if half the people to whom I sell lose
their jobs to robot machines?


SOCIAL CONTROL AND ITS TWO SIDES

The two chief harmful effects upon humanity which are to be expected
from robot machines are physical danger and unemployment. These are
serious risks, and some degree of social control is needed to guard
against them.

There will also be very great advantages from robot machines. The
monster in _Frankenstein_ is right when he says, “Do your duty towards
me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of mankind.” And Harry
Domin in _R.U.R._ is right as to possibility when he says, “There will
be no poverty.... Everybody will be free from worry.” Social control
must also be concerned with how the advantages from robot machines are
to be shared.

The problem of social control over men and their devices has always had
two sides. The first side deals with what we might plan for control
if men were reasonable and tolerant. This part of the problem seems
relatively easy. The other side deals with what we must ordinarily
arrange, since most men are often unreasonable and prejudiced and, as a
result, often act in antisocial ways. This part of the problem is hard.
Let us begin with the easier side first.


TYPES OF CONTROL—IF MEN WERE REASONABLE

In seeking to fulfill wants and achieve safety, men have used hundreds
of types of control. The main types are usually called political and
economic systems, but there are always great quantities of exceptions.
The more mature and freer the society, the greater the variety of types
of control that can be found in it.

Probably the most widely used type of control in this country is
private and public control working together, as private ownership
and public regulation—for example, railroads, banks, airlines, life
insurance companies, telephone systems, and many others. It would be
reasonable to expect private ownership and public regulation of a
great many classes of robot machines, to the end that they would never
threaten the safety of people.

Another common type of control is public ownership and operation;
examples are toll bridges, airports, city transit systems, and
water-supply systems. Atomic energy was so clearly fraught with
serious implications that in 1946 the Congress of the United States
placed it entirely under public control expressed as the Atomic
Energy Commission. There is a class of robot machinery which has
already reached the stage of acute public concern: guided missiles and
automatic fire-control. It would be reasonable that in this country
all activity in this subdivision should be under close control by the
Department of Defense.

In the international arena, again, the problem becomes soluble if
we assume men to be reasonable. An international agency, such as an
organ of the United Nations, would take over inspection and control of
robot machine activities closely affecting the public safety anywhere
in the world. Particularly, this agency would concern itself with
guided missiles, robot pilots for planes, automatic gunfire control,
etc. Much manufacturing skill is needed to make such products as
these: the factories where they could be manufactured would thereby
be determined. Also, a giant brain is a useful device for solving
scientific problems about weapons of mass destruction. So the agency
would need to inspect the problems being solved on such machines. This
agency would be responsible to a legislature or an executive body
representing all the people in the world—if men were reasonable.

In regard to the effects of robot machines on unemployment, again,
if men were reasonable, the problem would be soluble. The problem is
equivalent to the problem of abundance: how should men distribute the
advantages of a vast increase in production among all the members of
society in a fair and sensible way? A vast increase in production is
not so impossible as it may seem. For example, in 1939, with 45 million
employed, the United States index of industrial production was at 109,
and, in 1943, with 52½ million employed, the index of production was at
239.

If men were reasonable, the net profits from robot machinery would
be divided among (1) those who had most to do with devising the new
machinery, and (2) all of society. A rule would be adopted (probably
it could be less complicated than some existing tax rules) which would
take into account various factors such as rewards to the inventors,
incentives to continue inventing, adequate assistance to those made
unemployed by the robot machines, reduction of prices to benefit
consumers, and contributions to basic and applied scientific research.

In fact, under the assumption “if men were reasonable,” it would hardly
be necessary to devote a chapter to the problem of social control over
robot machines!


OBSTACLES

The discussion above of how robot machines could be controlled
supposing that men were reasonable, seems, of course, to be glaringly
impractical. Men are not reasonable on most occasions most of the time.
If we stopped at this point, again we would be dodging the issue. What
are the obstacles to reasonable control?

There are, it seems, two big obstacles and one smaller one to
reasonable types of social control over robot machines. The smaller
one is ignorance, and the two big obstacles are prejudice and a narrow
point of view.


Ignorance

By ignorance we mean lack of knowledge and information. Now mechanical
brains are a new and intricate subject. A great many people will,
through no fault of their own, naturally remain uninformed about
mechanical brains and robot machines for a long time. However, there is
a widespread thirst for knowledge these days: witness in magazines, for
example, the growth of the article and the decline of the essay. There
is also a fairly steady surge of knowledge from the austere scientific
fountain of new technology. We can thus see both a demand and a supply
for information in such fields as mechanical brains and robot machines.
We can expect, therefore, a fairly steady decline in ignorance.


Prejudice

Prejudice is a much more serious obstacle to reasonable control over
robot machines. It will be worth our while to examine it at length.

Prejudice is frequent in human affairs. For example, in some countries,
but not in all, there is conflict among men, based on their religious
differences. Again, in other countries, but not in all, there is
wide discrimination among men, based on the color of their skin.
Over the whole world today, there is a sharp lack of understanding
between conservatives, grading over to reactionaries, on the one
hand, and liberals, grading over to radicals, on the other hand. All
these differences are based on men’s attitudes, on strongly held
sets of beliefs. These attitudes are not affected by “information”;
the “information” is not believed. The attitudes are not subject to
“judgment”; they come “before judgment”: they are prejudices. Even
in the midst of all the science of today, prejudice is widespread.
In Germany, from 1933 to 1939, we saw one of the most scientific of
countries become one of the most prejudiced.

Prejudice is often difficult to detect. We find it hard to recognize
even in ourselves. For a prejudice always seems, to the person who
has it, the most natural attitude in the world. As we listen to other
people, we are often uncertain how to separate information, guesses,
humor, prejudice, etc. Circumstances compel us to accept provisionally
quantities of statements just on other people’s say-so. A good test
of a statement for prejudice, however, is to compare it with the
scientific view.

Prejudice is most dangerous for society. Its more extreme
manifestations are aggressive war, intolerance (especially of strange
people and customs), violence, race hatred, etc. In the consuming
hatred that a prejudiced man has towards the object of his prejudice,
he is likely to destroy himself and destroy many more people besides.
In former days, the handy weapon was a sword or a pistol; not too much
damage could be done when one man ran amuck. But nowadays a single use
of a single weapon has slain 70,000 people (the atom bomb dropped at
Hiroshima), and so a great many people live anxious and afraid.

What is prejudice? How does it arise? How can it be cured, and thus
removed from obstructing reasonable control over robot machines and the
rest of today’s amazing scientific developments?

Prejudice is a disease of men’s minds. It is infectious. The cause and
development of the disease are about as follows: Deprive someone of
something he deeply needs, such as affection, food, or opportunity.
In this way hurt him, make him resentful, hostile; but prevent him
from expressing his resentments in a reasonable way, giving him
instead false outlets, such as other people to hurt, myths to believe,
hostile behavior patterns to imitate. He will then break out with
prejudices as if they were measles. The process of curing the disease
of prejudice is about as follows: Make friends with the patient; win
his trust. Encourage him to pour out his half-forgotten hates. Help him
to talk them over freely, by means of questions but not criticisms,
until finally the patient achieves insight, sees through his former
prejudices, and drops them.

In these days prejudice is a cardinal problem of society. It is
perhaps conservative to say that a chief present requirement for the
survival of human society—with the atom bomb, bacterial warfare, guided
missiles, etc., near at hand—is cure of prejudice and its consequences,
irrational and unrestrained hate.


Narrow Point of View

A narrow point of view regarding what is desirable or good is the third
obstacle to rational control over robot machines. What do we mean by
this?

Our point of view as a two-year-old is based on pure self-interest.
If we see a toy, we grab it. There is no prejudice about this; it is
entirely natural—for two-year-olds. As we grow older, our point of
view concerning what is good or desirable rapidly broadens: we think
of others and their advantage besides our own. For example, we may
become interested in a conservation program to conserve birds, or soil,
or forests, and our point of view expands, embraces these objectives,
which become part of our personality and loyalties.

Unfortunately, it seems to be true that the expanding point of view,
the expanding loyalties, of most people as they grow up are arrested
somewhere along the line of: self, family, neighborhood, community,
section of country, nation. An honorable exception is the scientists’
old and fine tradition of world-wide unity and loyalty in the search
for objective truth.

Now the problem of rational control over robot machines and other
parts of the new technology is no respecter of national boundaries. To
be solved it requires a world-wide point of view, a loyalty to human
society and its best interests, a social point of view.

Almost all that you and I have and do and think is the result of a long
history of human society on this earth. All men on the earth today are
descendants of other men who lived 1000, 2000, 3000 ... years ago,
whether they were Romans or Chinese or Babylonians or Mayas or members
of any other race. To ride in a subway or an airplane, to talk on the
telephone, to speak a language, to calculate, to survive smallpox or
the black death, etc.—all these privileges are our inheritance from
countless thousands of other human beings, of many countries, and
nearly all of whom are now dead. During our lives we pass on to our own
children an inheritance in which our own contribution is remarkably
small. Since each person is the child of two others, the number of
our forefathers is huge, and we are all undoubtedly blood cousins.
Because of this relationship, and because we owe to the rest of
society nearly all that we are, we have a social responsibility—we need
to hold a social point of view. Each of us needs to accept and welcome
a world-wide social responsibility, as a member of human society, as
a beneficiary and trustee of our human inheritance. Otherwise we are
drones, part of the hive without earning our keep. The social point of
view is equitable, it is inspiring, and it is probably required now in
order for human beings to survive. We need to let go of a narrow point
of view.


CONCLUSION

We have now outlined the problem of social control over robot machines,
supposing that human beings were reasonable. We have also discussed the
practical obstacles that obstruct reasonable control.

It is not easy to think of any yet organized group of people anywhere
that would have both the strength and the vision needed to solve this
problem through its own efforts. For example, a part of the United
Nations might have some of the vision needed, but it does not have the
power. Consequently, it is necessary and desirable for individuals
and groups everywhere to take upon themselves an added load of social
responsibility—just as they tend to do in time of war. People often
“want to do their share.” Through encouragement and education, the
basic attitude of a number of people can contain more of “This is our
business; we have a responsibility for helping to solve this problem.”
We also need public responsibility; we need a public body responsible
for study, education, advice, and some measure of control. It might
be something like an Atomic Energy Commission, Bacterial Defense
Commission, Mental Health Commission, and Robot Machine Commission, all
rolled into one.

When, at last, there is an effective guarantee of the two elements
physical safety and adequate employment, then at last we shall all
be free from the threat of the robot machine. We can then welcome
the robot machine as our deliverer from the long hard chores of many
centuries.




Supplement 1

WORDS AND IDEAS


The purpose of this book is to explain machines that think, without
using technical words any more than necessary. This supplement is a
digression. Its purposes are to consider how to explain in this way and
to discuss the attempt made in this book to achieve simple explanation.


WORDS AS INSTRUMENTS FOR EXPLAINING

Words are the chief instruments we use for explaining. Of course, many
other devices—pictures, numbers, charts, models, etc.—are also used;
but words are the prime tools. We do most of our explaining with them.

Words, however, are not very good instruments. Like a stone arrow-head,
a word is a clumsy weapon. In the first place, words mean different
things on different occasions. The word “line,” for example, has more
than fifty meanings listed in a big dictionary. How do we handle the
puzzle of many meanings? As we grow older we gather experience and we
develop a truly marvelous capacity to listen to a sentence and then
fit the words together into a pattern that makes sense. Sometimes we
notice the time lag while our brain hunts for the meaning of a word we
have heard but not grasped. Then suddenly we guess the needed meaning,
whereupon we grasp the meaning of the sentence as a whole in much the
same way as the parts of a puzzle click into place when solved.

Another trouble with words is that often there is no good way to tell
someone what a word means. Of course, if the word denotes a physical
object, we can show several examples of the object and utter the word
each time. In fact, several good illustrations of a word denoting a
physical thing often tell most of its meaning. But the rest of its
meaning we often do not learn for years, if ever. For instance, two
people would more likely disagree than agree about what should be
called a “rock” and what should be called a “stone,” if we showed them
two dozen examples.

In the case of words not denoting physical objects, like “and,” “heat,”
“responsibility,” we are worse off. We cannot show something and say,
“That is a ···.” The usual dictionary is of some help, but it has a
tendency to tell us what some word _A_ means by using another word _B_,
and when we look up the other word _B_ we find the word _A_ given as
its meaning. Mainly, however, to determine the meanings of words, we
gather experience: we soak up words in our brains and slowly establish
their meanings. We seem to use an unconscious reasoning process: we
notice how words are used together in patterns, and we conclude what
they must mean. Clearly, then, words being clumsy instruments, the
more experience we have had with a word, the more likely we are to be
able to use it, work with it, and understand it. Therefore explanation
should be based chiefly on words with which we have had the most
experience. What words are these? They will be the well-known words. A
great many of them will be short.


SET OF WORDS FOR EXPLAINING

Now what is the set of all the words needed to explain simply a
technical subject like machines that think? For we shall need more
words than just the well-known and short ones. This question doubtless
has many answers; but the answer used in this book was based on the
following reasoning. In a book devoted to explanation, there will be
a group of words (1) that are supposed to be known already or to be
learned while reading, and (2) that are used as building blocks in
later explanation and definitions. Suppose that we call these words the
_words for explaining._ There are at least three groups of such words:

    _Group 1._ Words not specially defined that are so
        familiar that every reader will know all of them;
        for example, “is,” “much,” “tell.”

    _Group 2._ Words not specially defined that are
        familiar, but perhaps some reader may not know some
        of them; for example, “alternative,” “continuous,”
        “indicator.”

    _Group 3._ Words that are not familiar, that many
        readers are not expected to know, and that are
        specially defined and explained in the body of the
        book; for example, “abacus,” “trajectory,” “torque.”

In writing this book, it was not hard to keep track of the words in the
third group. These words are now listed in the index, together with
the page where they are defined or explained. (The index, of course,
also lists phrases that are specially defined.)

But what division should be made between the other two groups? A
practical, easy, and conservative way to separate most words between
the first and second groups seemed to be on the basis of number of
syllables. All words of one syllable—if not specially defined—were put
in Group 1. Also, if a word became two syllables only because of the
addition of one of the endings “-es,” “-ed,” “-ing,” it was kept in
Group 1, for these endings probably do not make a word any harder to
understand. In addition, there were put into Group 1:

    1. Numbers; for example, “186,000”; “³/₁₀”.

    2. Places: “Philadelphia”; “Massachusetts”.

    3. Nations, organizations, people, etc.: “Swedish”; “Bell”.

    4. Years and dates: “February”; “1946”.

    5. Names of current books or articles and their authors.

Of course, not all these words would be familiar to every reader (for
example, “Maya”), but in the way they occur, they are usually not
puzzling, for we can tell from the context just about what they must
mean.

All remaining words for explaining—chiefly, words of two or more
syllables and not specially defined—were put in Group 2 and were
listed during the writing of this book. Many Group 2 words, of course,
would be entirely familiar to every reader; but the list had several
virtues. No hard words would suddenly be sprung like a trap. The
same word would be used for the same idea. Every word of two or more
syllables was continually checked: is it needed? can it be replaced by
a shorter word? It is perhaps remarkable that there were fewer than
1800 different words allowed to stay in this list. This fact should be
a comfort to a reader, as it was to the author.

Now there are more words in this book than _words for explaining_. So
we shall do well to recognize:

    _Group 4._ Words that do not need to be known or learned
       and that are not used in later explanation and definitions.

These words occur in the book in such a way that understanding them,
though helpful, is not essential. One subdivision of Group 4 are names
that appear just once in the book, as a kind of side remark, for
example, “a chemical, called _acetylcholine_.” Such a name will also
appear in the index, but it is not a _word for explaining_. Another
subdivision of Group 4 are words occurring only in quotations. For
example, in the quotation from _Frankenstein_ on page 198, a dozen
words appear that occur nowhere else in the book, including “daemon,”
“dissoluble,” “maw,” “satiate.” Clearly we would destroy the entire
flavor of the quotation if we changed any of these words in any way.
But only the general drift of the quotation is needed for understanding
the book, and so these words are Group 4 words.

In this way the effort to achieve simple explanation in this book
proceeded. But even supposing that we could reach the best set of words
for explaining, there is more to be done. How do we go from simple
explanation to understanding?


UNDERSTANDING IDEAS

_Understanding_ an idea is basically a standard process. First, we
find the name of the idea, a word or phrase that identifies it. Then,
we collect true statements about the idea. Finally, we practice using
them. The more true statements we have gathered, and the more practice
we have had in applying them, the more we understand the idea.

For example, do you understand zero? Here are some true statements
about zero.

    1. Zero is a number.
    2. It is the number that counts none or nothing.
    3. It is marked 0 in our usual numeral writing.
    4. The ancient Romans, however, had no numeral for it.
        Apparently, they did not think of zero as a number.
    5. 0 is what you get when you take away 17 from 17, or
        when you subtract any number from itself.
    6. If you add 0 to 23, you get 23; and if you add 0 to
        any number, you get that number unchanged.
    7. If you subtract 0 from 48, you get 48; and if you
        subtract 0 from any number, you get that number
        unchanged.
    8. If you multiply 0 by 71, you get 0; and if you
        multiply together 0 and any number, you get 0.
    9. Usually you are not allowed to divide by 0: that is
        against the rules of arithmetic.
    10. But if you do, and if you divide 12 by 0, for
        example—and there are times when this is not
        wrong—the result is called _infinity_ and is
        marked ∞, a sign that is like an 8 on its side.

This is not all the story of zero; it is one of the most important of
numbers. But, if you know these statements about zero, and have had
some practice in applying them, you have a good _understanding_ of
zero. Incidentally, a mechanical brain knows all these statements about
zero and a few more; they must be built into it.

For us to understand any idea, then, we pursue three aims:

    1. We find out what it is called.
    2. We collect true statements about it.
    3. We apply those statements—we use them in situations.

We can do this about any idea. Therefore, we can understand any idea,
and the degree of our understanding increases as the number of true
statements mastered increases.

Perhaps this seems to be a rash claim. Of course, it may take a good
deal of time to collect true statements about many ideas. In fact, a
scientist may spend thirty years of his life trying to find out from
experiment the truth or falsehood of one statement, though, when he has
succeeded, the fact can be swiftly told to others. Also, we all vary in
the speed, perseverance, skill, etc., with which we can collect true
statements and apply them. Besides, some of us have not been taught
well and have little faith in our ability to carry out this process:
this is the greatest obstacle of all. But, there is in reality no idea
in the field of existing science and knowledge which you or I cannot
understand. The road to understanding lies clear before us.




Supplement 2

MATHEMATICS


In the course of our discussion of machines that think, we have had to
refer without much explanation to a number of mathematical ideas. The
purpose of this supplement is to explain a few of these ideas a little
more carefully than seemed easy to do in the text and, at the end of
the supplement, to put down briefly some additional notes for reference.


DEVICES FOR MULTIPLICATION

Suppose that we have to multiply 372 by 465. With the ordinary school
method, we write 465 under the 372 and proceed about as follows: 5
times 2 is 10, put down the 0 and carry the 1; 5 times 7 is 35, 35 and
1 is 36, put down the 6 and carry the 3; 5 times 3 is 15, 15 and 3 is
18, put down the 8 and carry the 1; ... The method is based mainly on a
well-learned subroutine of continually changing steps:

    1. Select a multiplicand digit.
    2. Select a multiplier digit.
    3. Refer to the multiplication table with these digits.
    4. Obtain the value of their product, called a _partial product_.
    5. Add the preceding carry.
    6. Set down the right-hand digit.
    7. Carry the left-hand digit.

We can, however, simplify this subroutine for a machine by delaying the
carrying. We collect in one place all the right-hand digits of partial
products, collect in another place all the left-hand digits, and delay
all addition until the end.

For example, let us multiply 372 by 465 with this method:


    RIGHT-HAND      LEFT-HAND       USUAL METHOD,
      DIGITS          DIGITS       FOR COMPARISON

        372             372               372
      × 465           × 465             × 465
     ——————          ——————            ——————
        550            131               1860
       822            141               2232
      288            120               1488
      —————          —————             ——————
      37570          13541             172980

            FINAL ADDITION

                   37570
                + 13541
                ————————
                  172980


37570 is called the _right-hand component_ of the product. It is
convenient to fill in with 0 the space at the end of 13541 and to call
135410 the _left-hand component_ of the product.

This process is called _multiplying by right- and left-hand components_.
It has the great advantage that no carrying is necessary to complete
any line of the original multiplications. Some computing machines
use this process. Built into the hardware of the machine is a
multiplication table up to 9 × 9. The machine, therefore, can find
automatically the right-hand digit and the left-hand digit of any
partial product. In a computing machine that uses this process, all
the left-hand digits are automatically added in one register, and
all the right-hand digits are added in another register. The only
carrying that is needed is the carrying as the right-hand digits are
accumulated and as the left-hand digits are accumulated. At the end of
the multiplication, one of the registers is automatically added into
the other, giving the product.

Another device used in computing machines for multiplying is to change
the multiplier into a set of digits 0 to 5 that are either positive or
negative. For example, suppose that we want to multiply 897 by 182. We
note that 182 equals 200 minus 20 plus 2, and so we can write it as

     _
    222.

The minus over the 2 marks it as a _negative digit_ 2. Then to multiply
we have:

        897
         _
        222
       ————
       1794
    - 1794
     1794
     ——————
     163254

The middle 1794 is subtracted. This process is usually called
_short-cut multiplication_. Everybody discovers this trick when he
decides that multiplying by 99 is too much work, that it is easier to
multiply by 100 and subtract once.


BINARY OR TWO NUMBERS

We are well accustomed to decimal notation in which we use 10 decimal
digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and write them in combinations
to designate decimal numbers. In _binary notation_ we use two binary
digits 0, 1 and write them in combinations to designate _binary
numbers_. For example, the first 17 numbers, from 0 to 16 in the
decimal notation, correspond with the following numbers in binary
notation:

    DECIMAL   BINARY     DECIMAL  BINARY
       0           0
       1           1        9      1001
       2          10       10      1010
       3          11       11      1011
       4         100       12      1100
       5         101       13      1101
       6         110       14      1110
       7         111       15      1111
       8        1000       16     10000

In decimal notation, 101 means one times a hundred, no tens, and one.
In binary notation, 101 means one times four, no twos, and one. The
successive digits in a decimal number from right to left count 1, 10,
100, 1000, 10000, ...—successive _powers_ of 10 (for this term, see the
end of this supplement). The successive digits in a binary number from
right to left count 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, ...—powers of 2.

The decimal notation is convenient when equipment for computing has ten
positions, like the fingers of a man, or the positions of a counter
wheel. The binary notation is convenient when equipment for computing
has just two positions, like “yes” or “no,” or current flowing or no
current flowing.

Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division can all be carried
out unusually simply in binary notation. The addition table is simple
and consists only of four entries.

    +   0   1
      +——————
    0 | 0   1
      |
    1 | 1  10

The multiplication table is also simple and contains only four entries.

    ×   0  1
      +——————
    0 | 0  0
      |
    1 | 0  1

Suppose that we add in binary notation 101 and 1001:

    BINARY ADDITION   CHECK

           101          5
        + 1001          9
        ——————         ———
          1110         14

We proceed: 1 and 1 is 10; write down 0 and carry 1; 0 and 0 is 0, and
1 to carry is 1; and 1 and 0 is 1; and then we just copy the last 1. To
check this we can convert to decimal and see that 101 is 5, 1001 is 9,
and 1110 is 14, and we can verify that 5 and 9 is 14.

One of the easiest ways to subtract in binary notation is to add a
_ones complement_ (that is, the analogue of the nines complement)
and use end-around-carry (for these two terms, see the end of this
supplement). A ones complement can be written down at sight by just
putting 1 for 0 and 0 for 1. For example, suppose that we subtract 101
from 1110:

                          SUBTRACTION BY
      DIRECT               ADDING ONES
    SUBTRACTION   CHECK     COMPLEMENT

        1110        14          1110
       - 101        -5        + 1010
       —————       ————       ——————
        1001         9       (1)1000
                              ↓
                               ⎯→  1
                              ——————
                                1001

Multiplication in the binary notation is simple. It amounts to (1)
adding if the multiplier digit is 1 and not adding if the multiplier
digit is 0, and (2) moving over or shifting. For example, let us
multiply 111 by 101:

    BINARY MULTIPLICATION   CHECK

              111              7
            × 101            × 5
            ——————
              111
            111
           ——————            ———
           100011             35

The digit 1 in the 6th (or _n_th) _binary_ place from the right in
100011 stands for 1 times 2 to the 5th (or _n_-1 th) power, 2 × 2 × 2
× 2 × 2 = 32. The result 100011 is translated into 32 plus 2 plus 1,
which equals 35 and verifies.

Division in the binary notation is also simple. It amounts to (1)
subtracting (yielding a quotient digit 1) or not subtracting (yielding
a quotient digit 0), and (2) shifting. We never need to try multiples
of the divisor to find the largest that can be subtracted yet leave a
positive remainder. For example, let us divide 1010 (10 in decimal)
into 10001110 (142 in decimal):

             1110 (14 in decimal)
        ——————————
    1010)10001110
          1010
         ——————
           1111
           1010
           —————
            1011
            1010
            —————
               10 (remainder, 2 in decimal)

In decimal notation, digits to the right of the decimal point count
powers of ⅒. In binary notation, digits to the right of the _binary
point_ count powers of ½: ½, ¼, ⅛, ¹/₁₆.... For example, 0.1011 equals
½ + ⅛ + ¹/₁₆, or ¹¹/₁₆.

If we were accustomed to using binary numbers, all our arithmetic
would be very simple. Furthermore, binary numbers are in many ways
much better for calculating machinery than any other numbers. The main
problem is converting numbers from decimal notation to binary. One
method depends on storing the powers of 2 in decimal notation. The rule
is: subtract successively smaller powers of 2; start with the largest
that can be subtracted, and count 1 for each power that goes and 0 for
each power that does not. For example, 86 in decimal becomes 1010110 in
binary:

    86
    64   64 goes         1
    ———
    22   32 does not go  0
    16   16 goes         1
    ———
     6    8 does not go  0
     4    4 goes         1
    ———
     2    2 goes         1
     2    1 does not go  0
    ———
     0

It is a little troublesome to remember long series of 1’s and 0’s; in
fact, to write any number in binary notation takes about 3⅓ times as
much space as decimal notation. For this reason we can separate binary
numbers into triples beginning at the right and label each triple as
follows:

    TRIPLE   LABEL
     000       0
     001       1
     010       2
     011       3
     100       4
     101       5
     110       6
     111       7

For example, 1010110 would become 1 010 110 or 126. This notation is
often called _octal notation_, because it is notation in the scale of
eight.


BIQUINARY OR _TWO-FIVE_ NUMBERS

Another kind of notation for numbers is _biquinary notation_, so called
because it uses both 2’s and 5’s. Essentially this notation is very
like Roman numerals, ancient style. By ancient style we mean, for
example, VIIII instead of IX. In the following table we show the first
two dozen numbers in decimal, biquinary, and ancient Roman notation:

    DECIMAL   BIQUINARY   ROMAN
       0           0
       1           1      I
       2           2      II
       3           3      III
       4           4      IIII
       5          10      V
       6          11      VI
       7          12      VII
       8          13      VIII
       9          14      VIIII
      10         100      X
      11         101      XI
      12         102      XII
      13         103      XIII
      14         104      XIIII
      15         110      XV
      16         111      XVI
      17         112      XVII
      18         113      XVIII
      19         114      XVIIII
      20         200      XX
      21         201      XXI
      22         202      XXII
      23         203      XXIII

The biquinary columns alternate in going from 0 to 4 and from 0 to 1.
The digits from 0 to 4 are not changed. The digits from 5 to 9 are
changed into 10 to 14. We see that the _biquinary digits_ are 0 to 4 in
odd columns and 0, 1 in even columns, counting from the right.

This is the notation actually expressed by the _abacus_. The beads of
the abacus show by their positions groups of 2 and 5 (see Fig. 1).

[Illustration: FIG. 1. Abacus and notations.]


SOME OPERATIONS OF ALGEBRA

One of the operations of algebra that is important for a mechanical
brain is _approximation_, the problem of getting close to the right
value of a number. Take, for example, finding _square root_ (see the
end of this supplement). The ordinary process taught in school is
rather troublesome. We can set down another process, however, using a
desk calculator to do division, which gives us square root with great
speed.

Suppose that we want to find the square root of a number _N_, and
suppose that we have _x_₀ as a guessed square root correct to one
figure. For example, _N_ might be 67.2 and _x_₀ might be 8, chosen
because 8 × 8 is 64, and 9 × 9 is 81, and it seems as if 8 should be
near the square root of 67.2. Here is the process:

    1. Divide _x_₀ into _N_, and obtain _N_/_x_₀.

    2. Multiply _x_₀ + _N_/_x_₀ by 0.5 and call the result _x_₁.

Now repeat:

    1. Divide _x_₁ into _N_ and obtain _N_/_x_₁.

    2. Multiply _x_₁ + _N_/_x_₁ by 0.5 and call the result _x_₂.

Every time this process is repeated, the new _x_ comes a great deal
closer to the correct square root. In fact it can be shown that, if
_x_₀ is correct to one figure, then:

    APPROXIMATION   IS CORRECT TO ··· FIGURES
       _x_₁                  2
       _x_₂                  4
       _x_₃                  8
       _x_₄                 16

Let us see how this actually works out with 67.2 and a 10-column desk
calculator.

    Round 1: 8 divided into 67.2 gives 8.4. One half of 8
      plus 8.4 is 8.2. This is _x_₁.

    Round 2: 8.2 divided into 67.2 gives 8.195122. One half
      of 8.2 plus 8.195122 is 8.197561. This is _x_₂.

    Round 3: 8.197561 divided into 67.2 gives 8.197560225.
      One half of 8.197561 and 8.197560225 is 8.1975606125.
      This is _x_₃.

    Checking _x_₃, we find that 8.1975606125 divided
      into 67.2 gives 8.1975606126 approximately.

In this case, then, _x_₃ is correct to more than 10 figures. In other
words, with a reasonable guess and two or three divisions we can
obtain all the accuracy we can ordinarily use. This process is called
_rapid approximation_, or _rapidly convergent approximation_, since it
_converges_ (points or comes together) very quickly to the number we
are seeking.

Another important operation of algebra is _interpolation_, the problem
of putting values smoothly in between other values. For example,
suppose that we have the table:

    _x        y_
      5      26
      6      37
      7      50
      8      65
      9      82

Suppose that we want to find the value that _y_ (or _yₓ_) ought to have
when _x_ has the value of 7.2. This is the problem of _interpolating y_
so as to find _y_ at the value of 7.2, _y_₇ˌ₂.

One way of doing this is to discover the formula that expresses _y_ and
then to put _x_ into that formula. This is not always easy. Another
way is to take the difference between _y_₇ and _y_₈, 15, and share
the difference appropriately over the distance 7 to 7.2 and 7.2 to 8.
We can, for example, take ²/₁₀ of 15 = 3, add that to _y_₇ = 50, and
obtain an estimated _y_₇ˌ₂ = 53. This is called _linear interpolation_,
since the difference 0.2 in the value of _x_ is used only to the first
power. It is a good practical way to carry out most interpolation
quickly and approximately.

Actually here _y_ = _x_² + 1, and so the true value of _y_₇ˌ₂ is (7.2 ×
7.2) + 1, or 52.84, which is rather close to 53. Types of interpolation
procedures more accurate than linear interpolation will come much
nearer still to the true value.


ALGEBRA OF LOGIC

We turn now to the _algebra of logic_. The first half of Chapter
9, “Reasoning” (through the section “Logical-Truth Calculation by
Algebra”), introduces this subject. There the terms _truth values_,
_truth tables_, _logical connectives_, and _algebra of logic_ are
explained. The part of Chapter 3, “A Machine That Will Think,” that
discusses the operations _greater-than_ and _selection_, also explains
some of the algebra of logic. It introduces, for example, the formula

    _p_ = _T_(_a_ > _b_) = 1, 0

This is a way of saying briefly that the truth value of the statement
“_a_ is greater than _b_” equals _p_; _p_ is 1 if the statement is true
and 0 if the statement is false. The truth value 1 corresponds with
“yes.” The truth value 0 corresponds with “no.”

With mechanical brains we are especially interested in handling
mathematics and logic without any sharp dividing line between them.
For example, suppose that we have a register in which a ten-digit
number like 1,765,438,890 may be stored. We should be able to use
that register to store a number consisting of only 1’s and 0’s, like
1,100,100,010. Such a number may designate the answers to 10 successive
questions: yes, yes, no, no, yes, no, no, no, yes, no. Or it may
tell 10 successive binary digits. The register then is three times
as useful: it can store either decimal numbers or truth values or
binary digits. We need, of course, a way to obtain from the register
any desired digit. For this purpose we may have two instructions to
the machine: (1) read the left-hand end digit; (2) shift the number
around in a circle. The second instruction is the same as multiplying
by 10 and then putting the left-most digit at the right-hand end.
For example, suppose that we want the 3rd digit from the left in
1,100,100,010. The result of the first circular shift is 1,001,000,101;
the result of the second circular shift is 0,010,001,011; and reading
the left-most digit gives 0. A process like this has been called
_extraction_ and is being built into the newest mechanical brains.

Using truth values, we can put down very neatly some truths of ordinary
algebra. For example:

    (the _absolute value_ of _a_) =
        _a_ × (the truth of _a_ greater than or equal to 0)
      - _a_ × (the truth of _a_ less than 0)

    ⎮_a_⎮ = _a_ · _T_(_a_ ≥ 0) - _a_ · _T_(_a_ < 0)

For another example:

    Either _a_ is greater than _b_,
      or else _a_ equals _b_,
      or else _a_ is less than _b_

    _T_(_a_ > _b_) + _T_(_a_ = _b_) + _T_(_a_ < _b_) = 1

Many common logical operations, like selecting and comparing, and
the behavior of many simple mechanisms, like a light or a lock, can
be expressed by truth values. Chapter 4, on punch-card mechanisms,
contains a number of examples.

       *       *       *       *       *


pronoun, variable

In ordinary language, a _pronoun_, like “he,” “she,” “it,” “the
former,” “the latter,” is a word that usually stands for a noun
previously referred to. A pronoun usually stands for the last preceding
noun that the grammar allows. In mathematics, a _variable_, like “_a_,”
“_b_,” “_x_,” “_m₁_,” “_m₂_” closely resembles a pronoun in ordinary
language. A variable is a symbol that usually stands for a number
previously referred to, and usually it stands for the same number
throughout a particular discussion.


multiplicand, dividend, augend, etc.

       IN THE           THE NAME       THE NAME    THE NAME
      EQUATION:        OF _a_ IS:     OF _b_ IS:   OF _c_ IS:

    _a_ + _b_ = _c_    augend         addend       sum
    _a_ - _b_ = _c_    minuend        subtrahend   remainder
    _a_ × _b_ = _c_    multiplicand   multiplier   product
    _a_ ÷ _b_ = _c_    dividend       divisor      quotient


_Augend_ and _addend_ are names of registers in the Harvard Mark II
calculator (see Chapter 10).


subtraction by adding, nines complement

Two digits that add to 9 (0 and 9, 1 and 8, 2 and 7, 3 and 6, 4 and 5)
are called _nines complements_ of each other. The _nines complement_ of
a number _a_ is the number _b_ in which each digit of _b_ is the nines
complement of the corresponding digit of _a_; for example, the nines
complement of 173 is 826. Ordinary subtraction is the same as addition
as of the nines complement, with a simple correction; for example, 562
less 173 (equal to 389) is the same as 562 plus 826 (equal to 1388)
less 1000 plus 1.


end-around-carry

The correction “less 1000 plus 1” of the foregoing example may be
thought of as carrying the 1 (in the result 1388) around from the
left-hand end to the right-hand end, where it is there added. So the 1
is called _end-around-carry_.


tens complement

Two digits that add to 10 are called _tens complements_ of each other.
The _tens complement_ of a number _a_, however, is equal to the nines
complement of the number plus 1. For example, the tens complement of
173 is 827. When subtracting by adding a tens complement, the left-most
digit 1 in the result is dropped. For example, 562 less 173 (equal to
389) is the same as 562 plus 827 (equal to 1389) less 1000.


power, square, cube, reciprocal, etc.

A _power_ of any number _a_ is _a_ multiplied by itself some number
of times. _a_ × _a_ × _a_ ... × _a_ where _a_ appears _b_ times is
written _a_ᵇ and is read _a_ to the _b_th power. _a_², a to the 2nd
power, is _a_ × _a_ and is called _a squared_ or the _square_ of _a_.
_a_³, _a_ to the 3rd power, _a_ × _a_ × _a_, is called _a cubed_, or
the _cube_ of _a_. _a_⁰, _a_ to the zero power, is equal to 1 for every
_a_. _a_¹, _a_ to the power 1, is _a_ itself. The first power is often
called _linear_. _a_ to some negative power is the same as 1 divided
by that power; that is, _a_⁻ᵇ = 1/_a_ᵇ. _a_⁻¹, _a_ to the power minus
1, is 1/_a_, and is called the _reciprocal_ of _a_. _a_¹ᐟ², _a_ to
the one-half power, is a number _c_ such that _c_ × _c_ = _a_, and is
called the _square root_ of _a_ and often denoted by √_a_.


table, tabular value, argument, etc.

An example of a _table_ is:

        0.025     0.03
      +——————————————————
    1 | 1.02500   1.03000
      |
    2 | 1.05063   1.06090
      |
    3 | 1.07689   1.09273

The numbers in the body of the table, called _tabular values_, depend
on or are determined by the numbers along the edge of the table, called
_arguments_. In this example, if 1, 2, 3 are choices of a number _n_,
and if 0.025, 0.03 are choices of a number _i_, then each tabular value
_y_ is equal to 1 plus _i_ raised to the _n_th power. _n_ and _i_ are
also called _independent variables_, and _y_ is called the _dependent
variable_. The table expresses a _function_ or _formula_ or _rule_. The
rule could be stated as: add _i_ to 1; raise the result to the _n_th
power.


constant

A number is said to be a _constant_ if it has the same value under
all conditions. For example, in the formula: (area of a circle) = π ×
(radius)², π is a constant, equal to 3.14159 ..., applying equally well
to all circles.


infinity

Mathematics recognizes several kinds of infinity. One of them occurs
when numbers become very large. For example, the quotient of 12 divided
by a number _x_, as _x_ becomes closer and closer to 0, becomes
indefinitely large, and the limit is called _infinity_ and is denoted ∞.


equation, simultaneous, linear

An example of two linear simultaneous _equations_ is:

    7_x_ + 8_t_ = 22

    3_x_ + 5_t_ = 11

_x_ and _t_ are called _unknowns_—that is, unknown variables—because
the objective of solving the equations is to find them. These equations
are called _simultaneous_ because they are to be solved together,
at the same time, for values of _x_ and _t_ which will fit in both
equations. The equations are called _linear_ because the only powers
of the unknowns that appear are the first power. Values that solve
equations are said to _satisfy_ them. It is easy to solve these two
equations and find that _x_ = 2 and _t_ = 1 is their solution. But
it is a long process to solve 10 linear simultaneous equations in 10
unknowns, and it is almost impossible (without using a mechanical
brain) to solve 100 linear simultaneous equations in 100 unknowns.


derivative, integral, differential equation, etc.

See the sections in Chapter 5 entitled “Differential Equations,”
“Physical Problems,” and “Solving Physical Problems.” There these
ideas and, to some extent, also the following ideas were explained:
formula, equation, function, differential function, instantaneous rate
of change, interval, inverse, integrating. See also a textbook on
calculus. If _y_ is a function of _x_, then a mathematical symbol for
the derivative of _y_ with respect to _x_ is _Dₓ y_, and a symbol for
the integral of _y_ with respect to _x_, is ∫_y dx_. An integral with
given initial conditions (see p. 83) is a _definite integral_.


exponential

A famous mathematical function is the _exponential_. It equals
the constant _e_ raised to the _x_ power, _eˣ_, where _e_ equals
2.71828.... The exponential lies between the powers of 2 and the powers
of 3. It can be computed from:

                       _x_²      _x_³
    _eˣ_ = 1 + _x_ + —————— + ————————— + ...
                      1 · 2   1 · 2 · 3

It is a solution of the differential equation _Dₓy_ = _y_. See also a
textbook on calculus. The _exponential to the base 10_ is 10ˣ.


logarithm

Another important mathematical function is the _logarithm_. It is
written log _x_ or logₑ _x_ and can be computed from the two equations:

    log _uv_ = log _u_ + log _v_

                          _x_²     _x_³
    log(1 + _x_) = _x_ - —————— + —————— - ..., _x_² < 1
                           2        3

It is a solution of the differential equation _Dₓy_ = 1/_y_. If _y_
is the logarithm of _x_, then _x_ is the _antilogarithm_ of _y_. The
_logarithm to the base 10_ of _x_, log₁₀ _x_, equals the _logarithm to
the base e_ of _x_, logₑ _x_, divided by logₑ 10. See also textbooks on
algebra and calculus.


sine, cosine, tangent, antitangent

These also are important mathematical functions. The _sine_ and
_cosine_ are solutions of the differential equation _Dₓ_(_Dₓy_) =-_y_
and are written as sin _x_ and cos _x_. They can be computed from

                     _x_³       _x_⁵
    sin _x_ = _x_ - —————— + ————————— - ...
                    1·2·3    1·2·3·4·5

                   _x_²      _x_₄
    cos _x_ = 1 - —————— + —————— - ...
                   1·2     1·2·3·4

The _tangent_ of _x_ is simply sine of _x_ divided by cosine of _x_. If
_y_ is the tangent of _x_, then _x_ is the _antitangent_ of _y_. See
also references on trigonometry and on calculus. _Trigonometric_ tables
include sine, cosine, tangent, and related functions.


Bessel functions

These are mathematical functions that were named after Friedrich W.
Bessel, a Prussian astronomer who lived from 1784 to 1846. Bessel
functions are found as some of the solutions of the differential
equation

    _x_² _Dₓ_(_Dₓy_) + x _Dₓy_ + (_x_² - _n_²)_y_ = O

This equation arises in a number of physical problems in the fields of
electricity, sound, heat flow, air flow, etc.


matrix

A _matrix_ is a table (or _array_) of numbers in rows and columns, for
which addition, multiplication, etc., with similar tables is specially
defined. For example, the matrix

          ⎮1  2⎮
          ⎮    ⎮
          ⎮3  4⎮

    plus the matrix

          ⎮5    20⎮
          ⎮       ⎮
          ⎮60  100⎮

    equals the matrix

          ⎮6    22⎮
          ⎮       ⎮
          ⎮63  104⎮.

(Can you guess the rule defining addition?)

Calculations using matrices are useful in physics, engineering,
psychology, statistics, etc. To add a _square matrix_ of 100 terms in
an array of 10 columns and 10 rows to another such matrix, 100 ordinary
additions of numbers are needed. To multiply one such matrix by
another, 1000 ordinary multiplications and 900 ordinary additions are
needed. See references on matrix algebra and matrix calculus.


differences, smoothness, checking

On p. 221, a sequence of values of _y_ is shown: 26, 37, 50, 65, 82.
Suppose, however, the second value of _y_ was reported as 47 instead
of 37. Then the _differences_ of _y_ as we pass down the sequence
would not be 11, 13, 15, 17 (which is certainly regular or _smooth_)
but 21, 3, 15, 17 (which is certainly not smooth). The second set of
differences would strongly suggest a mistake in the reporting of _y_.
The _smoothness_ of differences is often a useful check on a sequence
of reported values.




Supplement 3

REFERENCES


A book like the present one can cover only a part of the subject of
machines that think. To obtain more information about these machines
and other topics to which they are related there are many references
that may be consulted. There are still few books directly on the
subject of machines that think, but there are many articles and papers,
most of them rather specialized.

The purpose of this supplement is to give a number of these references
and to provide a brief, general introduction to some of them. The
references are subdivided into groups, each dealing with a branch of
the subject. The references in each group are in alphabetical order
by name of author (with “anonymous” last), and under each author they
are in chronological order by publication date. Some publications,
especially a forum or symposium, are listed more than once, according
as the topic discussed falls in different groups. In this supplement,
the sign three dots ( ...) next to the page numbers for an article
indicates that the article is continued on later, nonconsecutive pages.

It seemed undesirable to try to make the group of references dealing
with a subject absolutely complete, so long as enough were given to
provide a good introduction to the subject. It proved impractical
to try to make the citation of every single reference technically
complete, so long as enough citation was given so that the reference
could certainly be found. Furthermore, in a list of more than 250
references, errors are almost certain to occur. If any reader should
send me additions or corrections, I shall be more than grateful.


THE HUMAN BRAIN

No one yet knows specifically how particular ideas are thought about
in the human brain. The references listed in this section, however,
contain some information about such topics as:

    The structural differences, development, and evolution
      of the brains of animals, apes, primitive man, and
      modern man.
    The effect on the brain of blood composition, body
      temperature, supply of oxygen, and other biochemical
      factors.
    The structure and physiology of the brain, the nervous
      system, and nerve impulses.
    The theory of learning, intelligence, and memory.

    BARCROFT, JOSEPH, _The Brain and Its
        Environment_, New Haven: Yale University Press,
        1948, 117 pp.

    BEACH, FRANK A., Payday for Primates,
        _Natural History_, vol. 56, no. 10, Dec. 1947,
        pp. 448-451.

    BEACH, FRANK A., Can Animals Reason?
        _Natural History_, vol. 57, no. 3, Mar. 1948,
        pp. 112-116 ...

    BERRY, R. J. A., _Brain and Mind, or the
        Nervous System of Man_, New York: The Macmillan
        Co., 1928, 608 pp.

    BORING, EDWIN G., _A History of Experimental
        Psychology_, New York: Century Co., 1929, 699 pp.

    FRANZ, SHEPHERD I., _The Evolution of
        an Idea; How the Brain Works_, Los Angeles:
        University of California, 1929, 35 pp.

    HERRICK, C. JUDSON, _The Thinking
        Machine_, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
        1929, 374 pp.

    HERRICK, C. JUDSON, _Brains of Rats and
        Men_, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
        1930, 382 pp.

    LASHLEY, KARL S., _Brain Mechanisms and
        Intelligence_, Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 1929, 186 pp.

    PIERON, HENRI, _Thought and the Brain_,
        London: Kegan, Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., 1927,
        262 pp. Also New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co.

    SCHRÖDINGER, ERWIN, _What is Life?_,
        New York: The Macmillan Co., 1945, 90 pp.

    SHERRINGTON, CHARLES S., _The Brain and Its
        Mechanism_, Cambridge, England: The University
        Press, 1933, 35 pp.

    TILNEY, FREDERICK, _The Brain from Ape to
        Man_, New York: P. B. Hoeber, Inc., 1928,
        2 vol., 1075 pp.

    WIENER, NORBERT, _Cybernetics, or
        Control and Communication in the Animal and the
        Machine_, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1948, 194 pp.

    ANONYMOUS, Ten Billion Relays,
        _Time_, Feb. 14, 1949, p. 67.


MATHEMATICAL BIOPHYSICS

There has recently been another approach to the problem: How does
a brain think? A group of men, many of them in and near Chicago,
have been saying: “We know the properties of nerves, nerve impulses,
and simple nerve networks. We know the activity of the brain. What
mathematical model of nerve networks is necessary to account for the
activity of the brain?” These men have used mathematics, statistics,
and mathematical logic in the effort to attack this problem, and they
support a _Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics_.

    HOUSEHOLDER, ALSTON S., A Neural Mechanism for
        Discrimination, _Psychometrika_, vol. 4, no.
        1, Dec. 1939, pp. 45-58.

    HOUSEHOLDER, ALSTON S., and Herbert D.
        Landahl, _Mathematical Biophysics of the Central
        Nervous System_, Bloomington, Ind.: Principia
        Press, 1945.

    LANDAHL, HERBERT D., Contributions to the
        Mathematical Biophysics of the Central Nervous
        System, _Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics_,
        vol. 1, no. 2, June 1939, pp. 95-118.

    LANDAHL, HERBERT D., WARREN S.
        MCCULLOCH, and WALTER PITTS, A
        Statistical Consequence of the Logical Calculus
        of Nervous Nets, _Bulletin of Mathematical
        Biophysics_, vol. 5, no. 4, Dec. 1943,
        pp. 135-137.

    LANDAHL, HERBERT D., A Note on the
        Mathematical Biophysics of Central Excitation
        and Inhibition, _Bulletin of Mathematical
        Biophysics_, vol. 7, no. 4, Dec. 1945,
        pp. 219-221.

    LETTVIN, JEROME Y., and WALTER PITTS,
        A Mathematical Theory of the Affective Psychoses,
        _Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics_, vol. 5,
        no. 4, Dec. 1943, pp. 139-148.

    MCCULLOCH, WARREN S., and WALTER
        PITTS, A Logical Calculus of the Ideas
        Immanent in Nervous Activity, _Bulletin of
        Mathematical Biophysics_, vol. 5, no. 4,
        Dec. 1943, pp. 115-133.

    RASHEVSKY, N., _Mathematical Biophysics_,
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Revised
        edition, 1948, 669 pp.

    RASHEVSKY, N., Mathematical Biophysics of
        Abstraction and Logical Thinking, _Bulletin of
        Mathematical Biophysics_, vol. 7, no. 3,
        Sept. 1945, pp. 133-148.

    RASHEVSKY, N., Some Remarks on the Boolean
        Algebra of Nervous Nets in Mathematical Biophysics,
        _Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics_, vol. 7,
        no. 4, Dec. 1945, pp. 203-211.

    RASHEVSKY, N., A Suggestion for Another
        Statistical Interpretation of the Fundamental
        Equations of the Mathematical Biophysics of the
        Central Nervous System, _Bulletin of Mathematical
        Biophysics_, vol. 7, no. 4, Dec. 1945,
        pp. 223-226.

    RASHEVSKY, N., The Neural Mechanism of
        Logical Thinking, _Bulletin of Mathematical
        Biophysics_, vol. 8, no. 1, Mar. 1946, pp. 29-40.


LANGUAGES: WORDS AND SYMBOLS FOR THINKING

Hardly any field of techniques for thinking is more fascinating than
language. The following list of references, of course, is short; it is
meant chiefly as an introduction pointing out a number of different
paths into the field of language and languages. Such topics as the
following are introduced by the references in this list:

    The origin of languages and alphabets.
    The languages of the world, and speech communities.
    The comparison of words and structure from language to language.
    The significance of grammar and syntax.
    The problem of clear meanings.
    Writing and speaking that is easy to understand.

    BLOOMFIELD, LEONARD, _Language_,
        New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1933, 564 pp.

    BODMER, FREDERICK, and LAUNCELOT
        HOGBEN, _The Loom of Language_, New York:
        W. W. Norton & Co., 1944, 692 pp.

    FLESCH, RUDOLF, _The Art of Plain Talk_,
        New York: Harper & Brothers, 1946, 210 pp.

    GRAFF, WILLEM L., _Language and Languages:
        An Introduction to Linguistics_, New York:
        D. Appleton & Co., 1932, 487 pp.

    HAYAKAWA, S. I., _Language in Action_,
        New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1941, 345 pp.

    JESPERSEN, OTTO, _The Philosophy of
        Grammar_, New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1929
        (third printing), 359 pp.

    JESPERSEN, OTTO, _Analytic Syntax_,

    In this book, by means of a well-contrived system of letters
    and signs, the great linguistic scholar Jespersen depicts all
    the important inter-relations of English words and parts of
     words in connected speech.

    OGDEN, C. K., _The System of Basic
        English_, New York: Harcourt, Brace & Co., 1934,
        320 pp.

    SCHLAUCH, MARGARET, _The Gift of
        Tongues_, New York: Modern Age Books, 1942,
        342 pp.

    WALPOLE, HUGH R., _Semantics: The Nature
        of Words and Their Meanings_, New York:
        W. W. Norton & Co., 1941, 264 pp.


LANGUAGES: MACHINES FOR THINKING

For many years, nearly all references about machines as a language for
thinking have been specialized and limited. Colleges with scholars
who write textbooks usually have not had a variety of expensive and
versatile computing machinery. As a result, the main environment for
stimulating possible authors has until recently been missing. The list
of references is accordingly brief.

    AIKEN, HOWARD H., and others, _Proceedings
        of a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1948, 302 pp.

    COMRIE, JOHN LESLIE, The Application of
        Commercial Calculating Machines to Scientific
        Computing, _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids
        to Computation_, vol. 2, no. 16, Oct. 1946,
        pp. 149-159.

    CREW, E. W., Calculating Machines, _The
        Engineer_, vol. 172, Dec. 1941, pp. 438-441.

    FRY, MACON, _Designing Computing
        Mechanisms_, Cleveland, Ohio: Penton Publishing
        Co., 1946, 48 pp. (Reprinted from _Machine
        Design_, Aug. 1945 through Feb. 1946.)

    HARTREE, D. R., _Calculating Machines:
        Recent and Prospective Developments and Their
        Impact on Mathematical Physics_, Cambridge,
        England: The University Press, 1947, 40 pp.

    HORSBURGH, E. H., _Modern Instruments and
        Methods of Calculation_, London: G. Bell and
        Sons, Ltd., 1914, 343 pp.

    LILLEY, S., Mathematical Machines,
        _Nature_, vol. 149, Apr. 25, 1942, pp. 462-465.

    MURRAY, FRANCIS J., _The Theory of
        Mathematical Machines_, New York: King’s Crown
        Press, 1947, 116 pp.

    The author states that a mathematical machine is a mechanism
    that provides information concerning the relationships among
    a specified set of mathematical concepts.

    TURCK, J. A. V., _The Origin of Modern
        Calculating Machines_, Chicago: Western Society
        of Engineers, 1921.

    Recently, however, some magazine and newspaper publishers
    have seen news value in machines that think, and some good
    general articles with appeal to a wide audience have appeared.
    For the references to these articles, see the section of this
    supplement entitled “Digital Machines—Miscellaneous.”

PUNCH-CARD CALCULATING MACHINES

There are a few general references on punch-card calculating machines:

    BAEHNE, G. WALTER, editor, and others,
        _Practical Applications of the Punched Card
        Method in Colleges and Universities_, New York:
        Columbia University Press, 1935, 442 pp.

    This is a collection of many contributions from a
    number of authors, describing various applications,
    chiefly educational.

    ECKERT, W. J., _Punched-Card Methods in
        Scientific Computation_, New York: Columbia
        University, The Thomas J. Watson Astronomical
        Computing Bureau, 1940, 136 pp.

    This is a scientific treatise, chiefly relating to
    the computation of orbits in astronomy.

    HARTKEMEIER, HARRY PELLE, _Principles of
        Punch-Card Machine Operation_
       (Subtitle: _How to Operate Punch-Card Tabulating
        and Alphabetic Accounting Machines_), New York:
        Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1942, 269 pp.

    This is based on the author’s experience in teaching statistical
    analysis using IBM tabulators. The book does not deal with the
    collator or multiplying punch.

    HEDLEY, K. J., _The Development of the
        Punched-Card Method_, Actuarial Society of
        Australasia, 1946, 20 pp.

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        _International Business Machines_ (form no.
        A-4036-6-45), New York: International Business
        Machines Corporation, 1945, 65 pp.

    Pages 6 to 31 show pictures and brief descriptions of
    about 20 punch-card machines, available in 1945.

    SCHNACKEL, H. G., and H. C. LANG,
        _Accounting by Machine Methods_, New York:
        Ronald Press Co., 1939, 53 pp.

    WOLF, ARTHUR W., and EDMUND C.
        BERKELEY, _Advanced Course in Punched Card
        Operations_, Newark, N. J.: Prudential Insurance
        Company of America, 1942, 98 pp.

    A useful and authoritative description of IBM punch-card
    calculating machinery is the following:

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, _Machine Methods
        of Accounting_, Endicott, N. Y.: International
        Business Machines Corporation, 1936-41, 385 pp.

    This is a collection of 28 separate booklets telling the
    detailed operation of IBM punch-card machinery. They were
    written for employees of IBM and users of IBM equipment.
    The following list of the booklets is useful in locating them:

                                                                NO. OF
                TITLE                            FORM NO.  DATE  PAGES
    Machine Methods of Accounting—Foreword         AM      1936      6
    Development of IBM Corporation                 AM-1-1  1936     14
    Principles of the Electric Accounting
      Machine Method                               AM-2    1936     12
    The Tabulating Card                            AM-3-1  1936     20
    Design of Tabulating Cards                     AM-4-1  1936     16
    Preparation and Use of Codes                   AM-5    1936     28
    Organization and Supervision of the
      Tabulating Department                        AM-6    1936     16
    Selection and Training of Key Punch Operators  AM-7    1936     12
    Accounting Control                             AM-8    1936      8
    Punches                                        AM-9    1936     12
    Alphabetic Printing Punches                    AM-10   1936      7
    Facts to Know about Key Punches                AM-11   1936      4
    Verifiers                                      AM-12   1936      4
    Gang Punches                                   AM-13   1936      8
    Card-Operated Sorting Machines                 AM-14   1936     12
    Facts to Know about Sorters                    AM-14a  1936      4
    Electric Tabulating Machines                   AM-15   1936     20
    Electric Accounting Machines
       (Type 285 and Type 297)                     AM-16   1936     16
    Alphabetic Direct Subtraction Accounting
      Machine                                      AM-17   1936     28
    Numerical Interpreters                         AM-18   1936      8
    Electric Punched-Card Interpreter (Type 552)   AM-18a  1941      8
    Reproducing Punches (Type 512)                 AM-19   1936     16
    Automatic Summary Punches for Use with
      the Numerical Accounting Machines
      (Type 285-297)                               AM-20   1936     16
    Automatic Summary Punches for Use with
      the Alphabetic Accounting Machines
      (Type 405)                                   AM-20a  1940     16
    Multiplying Punches                            AM-21   1936     16
    Application of Machines to Accounting
      Functions                                    AM-22   1936     24
    Other International Products                   AM-23-2 1936     19
    The International Automatic Carriage
       (Type 921)                                  AM-24   1938     15

The Department of Education of IBM has begun a second series of
booklets on the principles of operation of punch-card calculating
machinery:

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
    DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION, _Principles of Operation_,
    Endicott, N. Y.: International Business Machines Corporation,
    1942 and later (except for one published in 1939).

Many of the booklets in this series have good examples of machine
operation and applications. Also, for the first time, letters and
numbers have been used as coordinates to label the hubs on the
plugboards. This series includes the following:

                                                               NO. OF
             TITLE                            FORM NO.   DATE  PAGES

                         CARD PUNCHES AND VERIFIERS
    Card-Punching and Verifying Machines      52-3176-0  1946   21
    Alphabetical Verifier, Type 055           52-3295-1  1946    4

                                INTERPRETERS
    Card Interpreters, Type 550, 551, and 552 52-3178-0  1946   14

                                REPRODUCERS
    Automatic Reproducing Punch, Type 513     52-3180-0  1945   22
    End Printing Reproducing Punch, Type 519  52-3292-1  1946   26

    Electric Document-Originating Machine,               June
    Type 519                                  52-3292-2  1948   26

                                 COLLATORS
    Collator                                  AM-25      1943   31
    Collator Counting Device                  C.R. 9178  1942   12

                             CALCULATING PUNCHES
    Electric Multiplier, Type 601             52-3408-1  1947   47
    Calculating Punch, Type 602               52-3409-0  1946   83
    Calculating Punch, Type 602               52-3409-5  1947   93
    Calculating Punch, Type 602-A
    (Preliminary Manual)                      22-5489-0  1948   59
    Electronic Multiplier, Type 603           52-3561-0  1946    5
    Electronic Calculating Punch, Type 604    22-5279-0  1948   51

                                  TABULATORS
    Accounting Machine, Type 402 and 403
    (Preliminary Manual)                      22-5654-0  1949  146
    Alphabetical Accounting Machine, Type 404 52-3395-1  1946   96
    Typical Applications, Alphabetical
      Accounting Machine, Type 404,
      with Multiple Line Printing             22-3771-1  1947   47
    Alphabetical Accounting Machine, Type 405 AM 17 (1), 1943   90
                                                Revised 1/1/43
                                                         Nov.
    Alphabetical Accounting Machine, Type 405 52-3179-2  1948   81

                           AUTOMATIC PRINTING CARRIAGES
    Bill Feed, Type 920                       52-3184-0  1945   21
    Form Feeding Device                       52-3235-0  1946   11
    Automatic Carriage, Type 921              52-3183-0  1945   36
    Tape-Controlled Carriage
     (Preliminary Manual, Revised)            22-5415-1  1948   27

                               TEST SCORING MACHINE
    Test Scoring Machine                      94-2333-0  1939   19
                                                         May
    Test Scoring Machine                      32-9145-1  1946   20
    Published Tests Adapted for Use with                 June
      the IBM Electric Test Scoring Machine   27-4286-9  1948    8

In addition to the new types of punch-card machines referred to in the
above list, an elaborate punch-card calculating machine is described in
the following reference:

    ECKERT, W. J., The IBM Pluggable Sequence
        Relay Calculator, _Mathematical Tables and Other
        Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 23, July 1948,
        pp. 149-161.

A description of punch-card machinery in rather a light vein is
contained in:

    ANONYMOUS, Speaking of Pictures: New
        Mechanical Monsters Ease _Life’s_ Growing Pains,
        _Life_, Sept. 15, 1947, pp. 15-16.

    ANONYMOUS, _540_, Chicago:
        Time-Life-Fortune Magazine,
        Subscription Fulfillment Office, 1948, 15 pp.

New types of punch-card machinery are continually coming into use.
Among them are: machines that take in punch cards and make punched
paper tape (such as teletype tape), and vice versa—useful for
transmitting punch-card information over wires; an electric typewriter
operated by punch cards—useful for preparing almanacs for sea and air
navigation, etc.; a calculator programmed by punch cards, consisting
of an assembly of a tabulator, an electronic calculating punch, and
an auxiliary storage unit, all cabled together—useful for some types
of long calculation; etc. For information about such machinery, the
manufacturers may be consulted.


PUNCH-CARD CALCULATING MACHINERY: APPLICATIONS

There are many articles in scientific journals on applications of
punch-card calculating machinery to technical problems. The fields of
engineering, education, indexing, mathematics, surveying, statistics,
and others are all represented in the following list of sample
references:

    ALT, FRANZ L., Multiplication of Matrices,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 2, no. 13, Jan. 1946,
        pp. 12-13.

    BAILEY, C. F., and others, Punch Cards for
        Indexing Scientific Data, _Science_, vol. 104,
        Aug. 23, 1946, p. 181.

    BOWER, E. C., On Subdividing Tables, _Lick
        Observatory Bulletin_, vol. 16, no. 455,
        Nov. 1933, pp. 143-144.

    BOWER, E. C., Systematic Subdivision of
        Tables, _Lick Observatory Bulletin_, vol. 17,
        no. 467, Apr. 1935, pp. 65-74.

    CLEMENCE, G. M., and PAUL HERGET,
        Optimum-Interval Punched-Card Tables,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 1, no. 6, Apr. 1944,
        pp. 173-176.

    CULLEY, FRANK L., Use of Accounting Machines
        for Mass-Transformation from Geographic to
        Military-Grid Coordinates, Washington, D. C.:
        National Research Council, _American Geophysical
        Union Transactions of 1942_, part 2, pp. 190-197.

    DEMING, W. EDWARDS, and MORRIS H.
        HANSEN, On Some Census Aids to Sampling,
        _Journal of the American Statistical
        Association_, vol. 38, no. 225, Sept. 1943,
        pp. 353-357.

    DUNLAP, JACK W., The Computation of Means,
        Standard Deviations, and Correlations by the
        Tabulator When the Numbers Are Both Positive
        and Negative, _Proceedings of the Educational
        Research Forum_, International Business Machines
        Corporation, Aug. 1940, pp. 16-19.

    DWYER, PAUL S., The Use of Tables in the
        Form of Prepunched Cards, _Proceedings of the
        Educational Research Forum_, International
        Business Machines Corporation, Aug. 1940,
        pp. 125-127.

    DWYER, PAUL S., Summary of Problems in
        the Computation of Statistical Constants with
        Tabulating and Sorting Machines, _Proceedings of
        the Educational Research Forum_, International
        Business Machines Corporation, Aug. 1940, pp. 20-28.

    DWYER, PAUL S., and ALAN D. MEACHAM,
        The Preparation of Correlation Tables on a
        Tabulator Equipped with Digit Selection, _Journal
        of the American Statistical Association_, vol.
        32, 1937, pp. 654-662.

    DYER, H. S., Making Test Score Data Effective
        in the Admission and Course Placement of Harvard
        Freshmen, _Proceedings of the Research Forum_,
        International Business Machines Corporation, 1946,
        pp. 55-62.

    ECKERT, W. J., and RALPH F. HAUPT,
        The Printing of Mathematical Tables,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 2, no. 17, Jan. 1947,
        pp. 196-202.

    FEINSTEIN, LILLIAN, and MARTIN
        SCHWARZCHILD, Automatic Integration of Linear
        Second-Order Differential Equations by Means of
        Punched-Card Machines, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 12, no. 8, Aug. 1941,
        pp. 405-408.

    HOTELLING, HAROLD, Some New Methods in
        Matrix Calculation, _The Annals of Mathematical
        Statistics_, vol. 14, no. 1, Mar. 1943, pp. 1-34.

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        editor, and others, _Proceedings of the
        Educational Research Forum_, Endicott, N. Y.:
        International Business Machines Corporation, 1941.

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        editor, and others, _Proceedings of the Research
        Forum_, Endicott, N. Y.: International Business
        Machines Corporation, 1946, 94 pp.

    KING, GILBERT W., Punched-Card Tables of the
        Exponential Function, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 15, no. 12, Dec. 1944,
        pp. 349-350.

    KING, GILBERT W., and GEORGE B.
        THOMAS, Preparation of Punched-Card
        Tables of Logarithms, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 15, no. 12, Dec. 1944, p. 350.

    KORMES, MARK, A Note on the Integration of
        Linear Second-Order Differential Equations by
        Means of Punched Cards, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 14, no. 4, Apr. 1943, p. 118.

    KORMES, MARK, Numerical Solution of the
        Boundary Value Problem for the Potential Equation
        by Means of Punched Cards, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 14, no. 8, Aug. 1943,
        pp. 248-250.

    KORMES, MARK, and JENNIE P. KORMES,
        Numerical Solution of Initial Value Problems by
        Means of Punched-Card Machines, _Review of
        Scientific Instruments_, vol. 16, no. 1,
        Jan. 1945, pp. 7-9.

    KUDER, G. FREDERIC, Use of the IBM Scoring
        Machine for Rapid Computation of Tables of
        Intercorrelations, _Journal of Applied
        Psychology_, vol. 22, no. 6, Dec. 1938,
        pp. 587-596.

    MAXFIELD, D. K., Library Punched Card
        Procedures, _Library Journal_, vol. 71,
        no. 12, June 15, 1946, pp. 902-905 ...

    MCLAUGHLIN, KATHLEEN, Adding Machines Nip AEF
        Epidemics, New York: _New York Times_,
        Apr. 27, 1945.

    MCPHERSON, JOHN C., On Mechanical Tabulation
        of Polynomials, _Annals of Mathematical
        Statistics_, Sept. 1941, pp. 317-327.

    MCPHERSON, JOHN C., Mathematical Operations
        with Punched Cards, _Journal of the American
        Statistical Association_, vol. 37, June 1942,
        pp. 275-281.

    MILLIMAN, WENDELL A., Mechanical
        Multiplication by the Use of Tabulating Machines,
        _Transactions of the Actuarial Society of
        America_, vol. 35, part 2, Oct. 1934, pp.
        253-264; for discussion see also vol. 36, part 1,
        May 1935, pp. 77-84.

    ROYER, ELMER B., A Machine Method for
        Computing the Biserial Correlation Coefficient in
        Item Validation, _Psychometrika_, vol. 6,
        no. 1, Feb. 1941, pp. 55-59.

    WHITTEN, C. A., Triangulation Adjustment by
        International Business Machines, Washington, D. C.:
        National Research Council, _American Geophysical
        Union Transactions of 1943_, part 1, p. 31.

The following bibliography may be obtained on request to the Watson
Scientific Computing Laboratory, Columbia University, 612 West 116
Street, New York 27, N. Y.:

    WATSON SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING LABORATORY,
        _Bibliography: The Use of IBM Machines in
        Scientific Research, Statistics, and Education_,
        New York: International Business Machines
        Corporation (form no. 50-3813-0), Sept. 1947, 25 pp.

The organization and equipment of this laboratory are described in:

    ECKERT, W. J., Facilities of the Watson
        Scientific Computing Laboratory, _Proceedings
        of the Research Forum_, International Business
        Machines Corporation, 1946, pp. 75-80.


THE DIFFERENTIAL ANALYZER

The basic scientific articles on the two differential analyzers at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology are:

    BUSH, VANNEVAR, The Differential Analyzer: A
        New Machine for Solving Differential Equations,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 212,
        no. 4, Oct. 1931, pp. 447-488.

    BUSH, VANNEVAR, and SAMUEL H.
        CALDWELL, A New Type of Differential Analyzer,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 240,
        no. 4, Oct. 1945, pp. 255-326.

Some of the less technical articles about the second differential
analyzer at M.I.T. are:

    CALDWELL, SAMUEL H., Educated Machinery,
        _Technology Review_, vol. 48, no. 1,
        Nov. 1945, pp. 31-34.

    GENET, N., 100-Ton Brain at M.I.T.,
        _Scholastic_, vol. 48, Feb. 4, 1946, p. 36.

    ANONYMOUS, Mathematical Machine; New
        Electronic Differential Analyzer, _Science News
        Letter_, vol. 48, Nov. 10, 1945, p. 291.

    ANONYMOUS, Robot Einstein: Differential
        Analyzer at M.I.T., _Newsweek_, vol. 26,
        Nov. 12, 1945, p. 93.

    ANONYMOUS, M.I.T.’s 100-Ton Mathematical Brain
        is Now to Tackle Problems of Peace, _Popular
        Science_, vol. 148, Jan. 1946, p. 81.

    ANONYMOUS, The Great Electro-Mechanical Brain;
        M.I.T.’s Differential Analyzer, _Life_,
        vol. 20, Jan. 14, 1946, pp. 73-74 ...

    ANONYMOUS, All the Answers at Your Fingertips;
        in the Laboratory of M.I.T., _Popular
        Mechanics_, vol. 85, Mar. 1946, pp. 164-167 ...

A differential analyzer was built at the Moore School of Electrical
Engineering:

    TRAVIS, IRVEN, Differential Analyzer
        Eliminates Brain Fag, _Machine Design_, July
        1935, pp. 15-18.

A differential analyzer was built at the General Electric Company,
Schenectady, N. Y. Instead of using a mechanical or electrical
amplifier of the motion of the little turning wheel riding on the
disc, this machine follows the motion using polarized light. This
machine is described in:

    BERRY, T. M., Polarized Light Servo System,
        _Transactions of the American Institute of
        Electrical Engineers_, vol. 63, Apr. 1944,
        pp. 195-197.

    KUEHNI, H. P., and H. A. PETERSON, A
        New Differential Analyzer, _Transactions of the
        American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 63, May 1944, pp. 221-227.

A differential analyzer has been put into use at the University of
California:

    BOELTER, L. M. K., and others, _The
        Differential Analyzer of the University of
        California_, Los Angeles: University of
        California, 1947, 25 pp.

A differential analyzer was built at Manchester University, England.
It was built first from “Meccano” parts, at a total cost of about 20
pounds, and later refined for more exact work. Some articles dealing
with this differential analyzer are:

    HARTREE, D. R., The Differential Analyzer,
        _Nature_, vol. 135, June 8, 1935, p. 940.

    HARTREE, D. R., The Mechanical Integration
        of Differential Equations, _The Mathematical
        Gazette_, vol. 22, 1938, pp. 342-364.

    HARTREE, D. R., and A. PORTER,
        The Construction of a Model Differential Analyser,
        _Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester
        Literary and Philosophical Society_, vol. 79,
        July 1935, pp. 51-72.

Other small scale differential analyzers built in England are covered
in:

    BEARD, R. E., The Construction of a Small
        Scale Differential Analyser and Its Application to
        the Calculation of Actuarial Functions, _Journal
        of the Institute of Actuaries_, vol. 71, 1942,
        pp. 193-227.

    MASSEY, H. S. W., J. WYLIE,
        and R. A. BUCKINGHAM, A Small Scale
        Differential Analyser: Its Construction and
        Operation, _Proceedings of the Royal Irish
        Academy_, vol. 45, 1938, pp. 1-21.

A differential analyzer constructed in Germany is briefly described in
the following:

    SAUER, R., and H. POESCH, Integrating
        Machine for Solving Ordinary Differential
        Equations, _Engineers Digest_ (American
        Edition), vol. 1, May 1944, pp. 326-328.

From the historical point of view there are some interesting papers on
a machine for solving differential equations by Sir William Thomson
(Lord Kelvin), including one by his brother James Thomson. They are
in the _Proceedings of the Royal Society_, vol. 24, Feb. 1876, pp.
262-275. The method of integration by a machine is described, but
the state of machine tools at the time was such that no accurate
mechanism was constructed. Another interesting paper foreshadowing the
differential analyzer is:

    WAINWRIGHT, LAWRENCE L., _A Ballistic
        Engine_, Chicago: University of Chicago,
        thesis for Master’s Degree, 1923, 28 pp.

Some of the applications and mathematical limitations of differential
analyzers are covered in:

    BUSH, V., and S. H. CALDWELL,
        Thomas-Fermi Equation Solution by the Differential
        Analyzer, _Physical Review_, vol. 38, no. 10,
        1931, pp. 1898-1902.

    HARTREE, D. R., A Great Calculating Machine:
        the Bush Differential Analyser and Its Applications
        in Science and Industry, _Proceedings of the
        Royal Institution of Great Britain_, vol. 31,
        1940, pp. 151-170.

    HARTREE, D. R., and A. PORTER,
        The Application of the Differential Analyser
        to Transients on a Distortionless Transmission
        Line, _Journal of the Institute of Electrical
        Engineering_, vol. 83, no. 503, Nov. 1938,
        pp. 648-656.

    HARTREE, D. R., and J. R. WOMERSLEY,
        A Method for the Numerical or Mechanical Solution
        of Certain Types of Partial Differential Equations,
        _Proceedings of the Royal Society of London_,
        series A, vol. 161, 1937, pp. 353-366.

    MAGINNISS, F. J., Differential Analyzer
        Applications, _General Electric Review_,
        vol. 48, no. 5, May 1945, pp. 54-59.

    SHANNON, CLAUDE E., Mathematical Theory of the
        Differential Analyzer, _Journal of Mathematics
        and Physics_, Cambridge, Mass.: Massachusetts
        Institute of Technology, vol. 20, no. 4, 1941,
        pp. 337-354.


HARMONIC ANALYZERS AND SYNTHESIZERS

Another branch of the analogue calculating machine is the harmonic
analyzer and synthesizer. These are machines that study wave motions
and related physical and mathematical functions. A brief list of
articles on this type of machine follows:

    ARCHER, R. M., Projecting Apparatus for
        Compounding Harmonic Vibrations, _Journal of
        Scientific Instruments_, vol. 14, 1937,
        pp. 408-410.

    BROWN, S. L., A Mechanical Harmonic
        Synthesizer-Analyzer, _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 228, 1939, pp. 675-694.

    BROWN, S. L., and L. L. WHEELER,
        A Mechanical Method for Graphical Solution
        of Polynomials, _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 231, 1941, pp. 223-243.

    BROWN, S. L., and L. L. WHEELER, Use
        of the Mechanical Multiharmonograph for Graphing
        Types of Functions and for Solution of Pairs of
        Non-Linear Simultaneous Equations, _Review of
        Scientific Instruments_, vol. 13, Nov. 1942,
        pp. 493-495.

    BROWN, S. L., and L. L. WHEELER,
        The Use of a Mechanical Synthesizer to Solve
        Trigonometric and Certain Types of Transcendental
        Equations, and for the Double Summations Involved
        in Patterson Contours, _Journal of Applied
        Physics_, vol. 14, Jan. 1943, pp. 30-36.

    FÜRTH, R., and R. W. PRINGLE, A
        New Photo-Electric Method for Fourier Synthesis
        and Analysis, _London, Edinburgh and Dublin
        Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science_,
        vol. 35, series 7, 1944, pp. 643-656.

    INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC BUREAU, _Tide
        Predicting Machines_, International Hydrographic
        Bureau, Special Publication 13, July 1926.

    KRANZ, FREDERICK W., A Mechanical Synthesizer
        and Analyzer, _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 204, 1927, pp. 245-262.

    MARBLE, F. G., An Automatic Vibration
        Analyzer, _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 22,
        Apr. 1944, pp. 376-380.

    MAXWELL, L. R., An Electrical Method for
        Compounding Sine Functions, _Review of Scientific
        Instruments_, vol. 11, Feb. 1940, pp. 47-54.

    MILLER, DAYTON C., A 32-Element Harmonic
        Synthesizer, _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 181, 1916, pp. 51-81.

    MILLER, DAYTON C., The Henrici Harmonic
        Analyzer and Devices for Extending and Facilitating
        Its Use, _Journal of the Franklin Institute_,
        vol. 182, 1916, pp. 285-322.

    MILNE, J. R., A “Duplex” Form of Harmonic
        Synthetiser and Its Mathematical Theory,
        _Proceedings of the Royal Society of
        Edinburgh_, vol. 39, 1918-19, pp. 234-242.

    MONTGOMERY, H. C., An Optical Harmonic
        Analyzer, _Bell System Technical Journal_,
        vol. 17, no. 3, July 1938, pp. 406-415.

    RAYMOND, W. J., An Harmonic Synthesizer Having
        Components of Incommensurable Period and Any
        Desired Decrement, _Physical Review_, vol. 11,
        series 2, 1918, pp. 479-481.

    ROBERTSON, J. M., A Simple Harmonic Continuous
        Calculating Machine, _London, Edinburgh and
        Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of
        Science_, vol. 13, 1932, pp. 413-419.

    SOMERVILLE, J. M., Harmonic Synthesizer for
        Demonstrating and Studying Complex Wave Forms,
        _Journal of Scientific Instruments_, vol. 21,
        Oct. 1944, pp. 174-177.

    STRAITON, A. W., and G. K. TERHUNE,
        Harmonic Analysis by Photographic Method,
        _Journal of Applied Physics_, vol. 14, 1943,
        pp. 535-536.

    WEGEL, R. L., and C. R. MOORE, An
        Electrical Frequency Analyzer, _Bell System
        Technical Journal_, vol. 3, 1924, pp. 299-323.


NETWORK ANALYZERS

A third branch of the analogue calculating machine is the network
analyzer. To solve problems, this machine uses the laws governing a
network of electrical circuits. For example, an electric power company
with a system of power lines over hundreds of miles may have a problem
about electrical power: will an accident or a sudden demand cause a
breakdown anywhere in the system? In the General Electric Company
in Schenectady, N. Y., there is a machine called the A.C. Network
Analyzer. All the properties of the power company’s network of lines
can be fed on a small scale into the analyzer. Certain dials are turned
and certain plugwires are connected. Then various kinds of “accidents”
and “sudden demands” are fed into the machine, and the response of the
system is noted. The answers given by the machine are multiplied by the
proper scale factor, and in this way the problem of the power company
is solved.

There are two kinds of problems that network analyzers are built to
solve: the steady state conditions and the transient conditions. For
example, you may not overload a fuse with an electric iron when it is
plugged in and being used, but as you pull out the cord, you may blow
the fuse: the steady state does not overstrain the system, but the
transient does.

Some articles on network analyzers are:

    ENNS, W. E., A New Simple Calculator of Load
        Flow in A.C. Networks, _Transactions of the
        American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 62, 1943, pp. 786-790.

    HAZEN, H. L., and others, _The M.I.T.
        Network Analyzer_, Cambridge, Mass.:
        Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department
        of Electrical Engineering, Serial No. 69, Apr. 1931.

    KUEHNI, H. P., and R. G. LORRAINE,
        A New A.C. Network Analyzer, _Transactions of the
        American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 57, 1938, pp. 67-73.

    PARKER, W. W., Dual A.C. Network Calculator,
        _Electrical Engineering_, May 1945,
        pp. 182-183.

    PARKER, W. W., The Modern A.C. Network
        Calculator, _Transactions of the American
        Institute of Electrical Engineers_, vol. 60,
        Nov. 1941, pp. 977-982.

    PETERSON, H. A., An Electric Circuit Transient
        Analyzer, _General Electric Review_,
        Sept. 1939, pp. 394-400.

    VARNEY, R. N., An All-Electric Integrator
        for Solving Differential Equations, _Review of
        Scientific Instruments_, vol. 13, Jan. 1942,
        pp. 10-16.

Some of the articles on applications of network analyzers to various
problems are:

    KRON, GABRIEL, Equivalent Circuits of the
        Elastic Field, _Journal of Applied Mechanics_,
        vol. A11, Sept. 1944, pp. 146-161.

    KRON, GABRIEL, Tensorial Analysis and
        Equivalent Circuits of Elastic Structures,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 238,
        Dec. 1944, pp. 399-442.

    KRON, GABRIEL, Numerical Solution of Ordinary
        and Partial Differential Equations by Means
        of Equivalent Circuits, _Journal of Applied
        Physics_, vol. 16, 1945, pp. 172-186.

    KRON, GABRIEL, Electric Circuit Models for
        the Vibration Spectrum of Polyatomic Molecules,
        _Journal of Chemical Physics_, vol. 14, no. 1,
        Jan. 1946, pp. 19-31.

    KRON, G., and G. K. CARTER, A.C.
        Network Analyzer Study of the Schrödinger Equation,
        _Physical Review_, vol. 67, 1945, pp. 44-49.

    KRON, G., and G. K. CARTER, Network
        Analyzer Tests of Equivalent Circuits of Vibrating
        Polyatomic Molecules, _Journal of Chemical
        Physics_, vol. 14, no. 1, Jan. 1946, pp. 32-34.

    PETERSON, H. A., and C. CONCORDIA,
        Analyzers for Use in Engineering and Scientific
        Problems, _General Electric Review_, vol. 48,
        no. 9, Sept. 1945, pp. 29-37.


MACHINES FOR SOLVING ALGEBRAIC EQUATIONS

Another branch of the analogue calculating machine is a type of machine
that will solve various kinds of algebraic equations (see Supplement
2). A list of some articles follows. The article by Mallock describes
a machine for solving up to 10 linear simultaneous equations in 10
unknowns, and the article by Wilbur, a machine for solving up to 9.

    DIETZOLD, ROBERT L., The Isograph—A
        Mechanical Root-Finder, _Bell Laboratories
        Record_, vol. 16, no. 4, Dec. 1937, pp. 130-134.

    DUNCAN, W. J., Some Devices for the Solution
        of Large Sets of Simultaneous Linear Equations,
        _London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical
        Magazine and Journal of Science_,
        vol. 35, series 7, 1944, pp. 660-670.

    FRAME, J. SUTHERLAND, Machines for Solving
        Algebraic Equations, _Mathematical Tables and
        Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 1, no. 9,
        Jan. 1945, pp. 337-353.

    HART, H. C., and IRVEN TRAVIS,
        Mechanical Solution of Algebraic Equations,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_,
        vol. 225, Jan. 1938, pp. 63-72.

    HERR, D. L., and R. S. GRAHAM, An
        Electrical Algebraic Equation Solver, _Review of
        Scientific Instruments_, vol. 9, Oct. 1938, pp.
        310-315.

    MALLOCK, R. R. M., An Electrical Calculating
        Machine, _Proceedings of the Royal Society_,
        series A, vol. 140, 1933, pp. 457-483.

    MERCNER, R. O., The Mechanism of the Isograph,
        _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 16, no. 4,
        Dec. 1937, pp. 135-140.

    STIBITZ, GEORGE R., Electric Root-finder,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 3, no. 24, Oct. 1948,
        pp. 328-329.

    WILBUR, J. B., The Mechanical Solution of
        Simultaneous Equations, _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 222, Dec. 1936, pp. 715-724.


ANALOGUE MACHINES—MISCELLANEOUS

Some articles referring to various other kinds of analogue machines and
their applications are here listed together:

    BUSH, V., F. D. GAGE, and R. R.
        STEWART, A Continuous Integraph, _Journal
        of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 203, 1927,
        pp. 63-84.

    GRAY, T. S., A Photo-Electric Integraph,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 212,
        1931, pp. 77-102.

    HAZEN, H. L., G. S. BROWN, and W.
        R. HEDEMAN, The Cinema Integraph: A Machine
        for Evaluating a Parametric Product Integral (two
        parts and appendix), _Journal of the Franklin
        Institute_, vol. 230, July 1940, pp. 19-44,
        and Aug. 1940, pp. 183-205.

    MCCANN, G. D., and H. E. CRINER,
        Mechanical Problems Solved Electrically,
        _Westinghouse Engineer_, vol. 6, no. 2,
        March 1946, pp. 49-56.

    MYERS, D. M., An Integraph for the Solution
        of Differential Equations of the Second-Order,
        _Journal of Scientific Instruments_, vol. 16,
        1939, pp. 209-222.

    PEKERIS, C. L., and W. T. WHITE,
        Differentiation with the Cinema Integraph,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 234,
        July 1942, pp. 17-29.

    SMITH, C. E., and E. L. GOVE,
        An Electromechanical Calculator for
        Directional-Antenna Patterns, _Transactions of
        the American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 62, 1943, pp. 78-82.

    YAVNE, R. O., High Accuracy Contour Cams,
        _Product Engineering_, vol. 19, part 2,
        Aug. 1948, 3 pp.

    ANONYMOUS, Electrical Gun Director
        Demonstrated, _Bell Laboratories Record_,
        vol. 22, no. 4, Dec. 1943, pp. 157-167.

    ANONYMOUS, Development of the Electric
        Director, _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 22,
        no. 5, Jan. 1944, pp. 225-230.

    ANONYMOUS, Old Field Fortune Teller:
        Electronic Oil Pool Analyzer, _Popular
        Mechanics_, vol. 86, Sept. 1946, p. 154.


HARVARD IBM AUTOMATIC SEQUENCE-CONTROLLED CALCULATOR

The basic scientific description of this machine as of September 1,
1945, is contained in:

    AIKEN, HOWARD H., and STAFF OF THE
        COMPUTATION LABORATORY, _A Manual of
        Operation for the Automatic Sequence-Controlled
        Calculator_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
        University Press, 1946, 561 pp.

The machine has changed rather a good deal since Sept. 1, 1945. Some
circuits have been removed. Other circuits have been added. The
capacity of the machine to do problems has been greatly increased.
The Computation Laboratory at Harvard University is cordial towards
scientific inquiries, and some unpublished, mimeographed information is
available at the laboratory regarding the details of these changes.

Some shorter scientific and technical descriptions of the machine are
contained in:

    AIKEN, HOWARD H., and GRACE
        M. HOPPER, The Automatic Sequence
        Controlled Calculator (3 parts), _Electrical
        Engineering_, vol. 65, nos. 8, 9, and 10,
        Aug. to Nov. 1946, p. 384 ... (21 pp.).

    BLOCH, RICHARD M., Mark I Calculator,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Harvard
        University Press, 1948, pp. 23-30.

    HARRISON, JOSEPH O., JR., The Preparation of
        Problems for the Mark I Calculator, _Proceedings
        of a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 208-210.

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        _IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled
        Calculator_, Endicott, N. Y.: International
        Business Machines Corporation, 1945, 6 pp.

Some of the less technical articles regarding the machine are:

    GENET, N., Got a Problem? Harvard’s Amazing
        New Mathematical Robot, _Scholastic_, vol. 45,
        Sept. 18, 1944, p. 35.

    TORREY, V., Robot Mathematician Knows All the
        Answers, _Popular Science_, vol. 145,
        Oct. 1944, pp. 86-89....

    ANONYMOUS, Giant New Calculator, _Science
        News Letter_, vol. 46, Aug. 12, 1944, p. 111.

    ANONYMOUS, Mathematical Robot Presented to
        Harvard, _Time_, vol. 44, Aug. 14, 1944, p. 72.

    ANONYMOUS, World’s Greatest Machine for
        Automatic Calculation, _Science News Letter_,
        vol. 46, Aug. 19, 1944, p. 123.

    ANONYMOUS, Superbrain, _Nation’s
        Business_, vol. 32, Sept. 1944, p. 8.

    ANONYMOUS, Robot Works Problems Never Before
        Solved, _Popular Mechanics_, vol. 82,
        Oct. 1944, p. 13.


ENIAC, THE ELECTRONIC NUMERIC INTEGRATOR AND CALCULATOR

There is as yet no full-scale, published scientific account of the
Eniac. At the Ballistic Research Laboratories, Aberdeen, Md., where
the machine now is, there are a few copies of some long mimeographed
reports on the machine and the way it works. These were prepared by
H. H. Goldstine and others when at the Moore School of Electrical
Engineering, as a part of the contract under which the machine was
constructed for the U. S. Government. It is possible that these reports
might be consulted on request by serious students.

Some scientific descriptions of the machine and its properties are:

    BURKS, ARTHUR W., Electronic Computing
        Circuits of the ENIAC, _Proceedings of the
        Institute of Radio Engineers_, vol. 35, no. 8,
        Aug. 1947, pp. 756-767.

    CLIPPINGER, R. F., _A Logical Coding System
        Applied to the Eniac_, B. R. L. Report No. 673,
        Aberdeen, Md.: Ballistic Research Laboratories,
        Sept. 29, 1948, 41 pp.

    ECKERT, J. PRESPER, JR., JOHN W.
        MAUCHLY, HERMAN H. GOLDSTINE, and
        J. G. BRAINERD, Description of the ENIAC
        and Comments on Electronic Digital Computing
        Machines, Applied Mathematics Panel Report 171.2R,
        Washington, D. C.: National Defense Research
        Committee, Nov. 1945, 78 pp.

    GOLDSTINE, HERMAN H., and ADELE
        GOLDSTINE, The Electronic Numerical Integrator
        and Computer (ENIAC), _Mathematical Tables and
        Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 2, no. 15,
        July 1946, pp. 97-110.

    HARTREE, D. R., The ENIAC, an Electronic
        Computing Machine, _Nature_, vol. 158,
        Oct. 12, 1946, pp. 500-506.

    HARTREE, D. R., _Calculating Machines:
        Recent and Prospective Developments and Their
        Impact on Mathematical Physics_, Cambridge,
        England: The University Press, 1947, 40 pp.
       (Pages 14 to 27 are devoted to the Eniac.)

    TABOR, LEWIS P., Brief Description and
        Operating Characteristics of the ENIAC,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Harvard
        University Press, 1948, pp. 31-39.

Some of the less technical articles on Eniac are:

    ROSE, A., Lightning Strikes Mathematics:
        ENIAC, _Popular Science_, vol. 148,
        Apr. 1946, pp. 83-86.

    ANONYMOUS, Robot Calculator: ENIAC, All
        Electronic Device, _Business Week_,
        Feb. 16, 1946, p. 50 ...

    ANONYMOUS, Answers by ENY: Electronic
        Numerical Integrator and Computer, ENIAC,
        _Newsweek_, vol. 27, Feb. 18, 1946, p. 76.

    ANONYMOUS, Adds in ¹/₅₀₀₀ Second: Electronic
        Computing Machine at the University of
        Pennsylvania, _Science News Letter_, vol. 49,
        Feb. 23, 1946, p. 113 ...

    ANONYMOUS, ENIAC: at the University of
        Pennsylvania, _Time_, vol. 47,
        Feb. 25, 1946, p. 90.

    ANONYMOUS, It Thinks with Electrons; the
        ENIAC, _Popular Mechanics_, vol. 85,
        June 1946, p. 139.

    ANONYMOUS, Electronic Calculator: ENIAC,
        _Scientific American_, vol. 174,
        June 1946, p. 248.


BELL LABORATORIES RELAY COMPUTERS

As yet no full-scale scientific report is available on the Bell
Laboratories general-purpose relay computers that went to Aberdeen and
Langley Field. However, there is some information about these and other
Bell Laboratories relay computing machines in the following articles:

    ALT, FRANZ L., A Bell Telephone Laboratories’
        Computing Machine (two parts), _Mathematical
        Tables and Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3,
        no. 21, Jan. 1948, pp. 1-13, and vol. 3, no. 22,
        Apr. 1948, pp. 69-84.

    CESAREO, O., The Relay Interpolator, _Bell
        Laboratories Record_, vol. 24, no. 12,
        Dec. 1946, pp. 457-460.

    JULEY, JOSEPH, The Ballistic Computer, _Bell
        Laboratories Record_, vol. 25, no. 1,
        Jan. 1947, pp. 5-9.

    WILLIAMS, SAMUEL B., A Relay Computer
        for General Application, _Bell Laboratories
        Record_, vol. 25, no. 2,
        Feb. 1947, pp. 49-54.

    WILLIAMS, SAMUEL B., Bell Telephone
        Laboratories’ Relay Computing System,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Harvard
        University Press, 1948, pp. 40-68.

    ANONYMOUS, Complex Computer Demonstrated,
        _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 19, no. 2,
        Oct. 1940, pp. v-vi.

    ANONYMOUS, _Computer Mark 22 Mod. 0:
        Development and Description_, Navord Report
        No. 178-45, Washington, D. C.: Navy Department,
        Dec. 6, 1945, 225 pp.

    ANONYMOUS, Relay Computer for the Army,
        _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 26, no. 5,
        May 1948, pp. 208-209.


THE KALIN-BURKHART LOGICAL-TRUTH CALCULATOR

As yet there are no published references on the Kalin-Burkhart
Logical-Truth Calculator.

Some books covering a good deal of mathematical logic are:

    QUINE, W. V., _Mathematical Logic_, New
        York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1940, 348 pp.

    REICHENBACH, HANS, _Elements of Symbolic
        Logic_, New York: The Macmillan Co., 1947, 444
        pp.

    TARSKI, ALFRED, _Introduction to Logic_,
        New York: Oxford University Press, 1941, 239 pp.

    WOODGER, J. H., _The Axiomatic Method in
        Biology_, Cambridge, England: The University
        Press, 1937, 174 pp.

        Chapter 2, pp. 18-52, is an excellent and
        understandable summary of the concepts of
        mathematical logic.


Several papers on the application of mathematical logic to the analysis
of practical situations are:

    BERKELEY, EDMUND C., Boolean Algebra
        (The Technique for Manipulating “And,” “Or,”
        “Not,” and Conditions) and Applications to
        Insurance, _Record of the American Institute of
        Actuaries_, vol. 26, Oct. 1937, pp. 373-414.

    BERKELEY, EDMUND C., Conditions Affecting
        the Application of Symbolic Logic, _Journal of
        Symbolic Logic_, vol. 7, no. 4, Dec. 1942,
        pp. 160-168.

    SHANNON, CLAUDE E., A Symbolic Analysis of
        Relay and Switching Circuits, _Transactions of
        the American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 57, 1938, pp. 713-723.

        This paper has had a good deal of influence here
        and there on the development of electric circuits
        using relays.

The following report discusses the solution of some problems of
mathematical logic by means of a large-scale digital calculator:

    TARSKI, ALFRED, _A Decision Method for
        Elementary Algebra and Geometry_, Report R-109,
        California: Rand Corporation, Aug. 1, 1948, 60 pp.


OTHER DIGITAL MACHINES FINISHED OR UNDER DEVELOPMENT


The Aiken Mark II Relay Calculator

The Computation Laboratory of Harvard University finished during
1947 a second large relay calculator, called the Aiken Mark II Relay
Calculator. This machine is alluded to briefly at the end of Chapter 10
and is described more fully in the following:

    CAMPBELL, ROBERT V. D., Mark II Calculator,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 69-79.

    FREELAND, STEPHEN L., Inside the Biggest
        Man-Made Brain, _Popular Science_, May 1947,
        pp. 95-100.

    MILLER, FREDERICK G., Application of Printing
        Telegraph Equipment to Large-Scale Calculating
        Machinery, _Proceedings of a Symposium on
        Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 213-222.


The Edsac

The Edsac is a machine under construction in England.

    WILKES, M. V., The Design of a Practical
        High-Speed Computing Machine: the EDSAC,
        _Proceedings of the Royal Society_, series A,
        vol. 195, 1948, pp. 274-279.

    WILKES, M. V., and W. RENWICK, An
        Ultrasonic Memory Unit for the EDSAC, _Electronic
        Engineering_, vol. 20, no. 245, July 1948,
        pp. 208-213.


The Edvac

The Edvac is a machine under construction at the Moore School of
Electrical Engineering, Philadelphia.

    KOONS, FLORENCE, and SAMUEL LUBKIN,
        Conversion of Numbers from Decimal to Binary Form
        in the EDVAC, _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids
        to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 26, Apr. 1949,
        pp. 427-431.

    ANONYMOUS, EDVAC Replaces ENIAC, _The
        Pennsylvania Gazette_, Philadelphia: University
        of Pennsylvania, vol. 45, no. 8, Apr. 1947,
        pp. 9-10.


The IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic Calculator

The IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic Calculator was finished and
announced in January 1948, and is alluded to briefly at the end of
Chapter 10. More information about this machine is in the following
references:

    ECKERT, W. J., Electrons and Computation,
        _The Scientific Monthly_, vol. 67, no. 5,
        Nov. 1948, pp. 315-323.

    INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION,
        _IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic
        Calculator_, New York: International Business
        Machines Corporation (form no. 52-3927-0), 1948,
        16 pp.


The Raytheon Computer

The Raytheon Computer is a machine under construction at the Raytheon
Manufacturing Co., Waltham, Mass.

    BLOCH, R. M., R. V. D. CAMPBELL,
        and M. ELLIS, The Logical Design of the
        Raytheon Computer, _Mathematical Tables and Other
        Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 24, Oct. 1948,
        pp. 286-295.

    BLOCH, R. M., R. V. D. CAMPBELL, and
        M. ELLIS, General Design Considerations
        for the Raytheon Computer, _Mathematical Tables
        and Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 24,
        Oct. 1948, pp. 317-323.


A “System of Electric Remote-Control Accounting”

During the 1930’s a system using connected punch-card machinery was
experimented with in a department store in Pittsburgh. The purpose of
the system was automatic accounting and analysis of sales. This system
is described in:

    WOODRUFF, L. F., A System of Electric
        Remote-Control Accounting, _Transactions of the
        American Institute of Electrical Engineers_,
        vol. 57, Feb. 1938, pp. 78-87.


The Univac

The Univac is a machine under construction at the Eckert-Mauchly
Computer Corporation, Philadelphia. A similar but smaller digital
computer called the Binac is also being developed.

    ECKERT-MAUCHLY COMPUTER CORPORATION, _The
        Univac System_, Philadelphia: Eckert-Mauchly
        Computer Corp., 1948, 8 pp.

    ELECTRONIC CONTROL CO. (now ECKERT-MAUCHLY
        COMPUTER CORP.), _A Tentative Instruction
        Code for a Statistical Edvac_, Philadelphia:
        Electronic Control Co. (now Eckert-Mauchly Computer
        Corp.), May 7, 1947, 19 pp.

    SNYDER, FRANCES E., and HUBERT M.
        LIVINGSTON, Coding of a Laplace Boundary Value
        Problem for the UNIVAC, _Mathematical Tables and
        Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 25,
        Jan. 1949, pp. 341-350.


The Zuse Computer

The Zuse Computer is a small digital computer constructed in Germany.

    LYNDON, ROGER C., The Zuse Computer,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 2, no. 20, Oct. 1947,
        pp. 355-359.


THE DESIGN OF DIGITAL MACHINES

Following are a number of references on various aspects of the design
of digital computing machines:


Organization

    BURKS, ARTHUR W., Super-Electronic Computing
        Machine, _Electronic Industries_, vol. 5,
        no. 7, July 1946, p. 62.

    BURKS, ARTHUR W., HERMAN H. GOLDSTINE
        and JOHN VON NEUMANN, _Preliminary
        Discussion of the Logical Design of an Electronic
        Computing Instrument_, Princeton, N. J.:
        Institute for Advanced Study, 2nd edition,
        Sept. 1947, 42 pp.

    ECKERT, J. PRESPER, JR., JOHN W.
        MAUCHLY, and J. R. WEINER, An
        Octal System Automatic Computer, _Electrical
        Engineering_, vol. 68, no. 4, Apr. 1949, p. 335.

    FORRESTER, JAY W., WARREN S. LOUD,
        ROBERT R. EVERETT, and DAVID R.
        BROWN, _Lectures by Project Whirlwind Staff
        on Electronic Digital Computation_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
        Servo-mechanisms Laboratory, Mar. and Apr. 1947,
        149 pp.

    LUBKIN, SAMUEL, Decimal Point Location in
        Computing Machines, _Mathematical Tables and
        Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 21,
        Jan. 1948, pp. 44-50.

    PATTERSON, GEORGE W., editor, and others,
        _Theory and Techniques for Design of Electronic
        Digital Computers_ (subtitle: _Lectures
        Given at the Moore School 8 July 1946-31
        August 1946_), Philadelphia: The University
        of Pennsylvania, Moore School of Electrical
        Engineering, vol. 1, lectures 1-10, Sept. 10, 1947,
        161 pp.; vol. 2, lectures 11-21, Nov. 1, 1947, 173
        pp.; vol. 3 and 4 in preparation.

    STIBITZ, GEORGE R., _Relay Computers_,
        Applied Mathematics Panel Report 171.1R,
        Washington, D. C.: National Defense Research
        Council, Feb. 1945, 83 pp.

    STIBITZ, GEORGE R., Should Automatic Computers
        be Large or Small? _Mathematical Tables and Other
        Aids to Computation_, vol. 2, no. 20, Oct. 1947,
        pp. 362-364.

    STIBITZ, GEORGE R., The Organization of
        Large-Scale Calculating Machinery, _Proceedings
        of a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1948, pp. 91-100.

    STIBITZ, GEORGE R., A New Class of Computing
        Aids, _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 3, no. 23, July 1948,
        pp. 217-221.


Input and Output Devices

    ALEXANDER, SAMUEL N., Input and Output Devices
        for Electronic Digital Calculating Machinery,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 248-253.

    FULLER, HARRISON W., The Numeroscope,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 238-247.

    O’NEAL, R. D., Photographic Methods for
        Handling Input and Output Data, _Proceedings of
        a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1948, pp. 260-266.

    TYLER, ARTHUR W., Optical and Photographic
        Storage Techniques, _Proceedings of a Symposium
        on Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 146-150.

    ZWORYKIN, V. K., L. E. FLORY, and
        W. S. PIKE, Letter-Reading Machine,
        _Electronics_, vol. 22, no. 6, June 1949,
        pp. 80-86.

    ANONYMOUS, Letter-Printing Cathode-Ray Tube,
        _Electronics_, vol. 22, no. 6, June 1949,
        pp. 160-162.


Storage Devices

    BRILLOUIN, LEON N., Electromagnetic Delay
        Lines, _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 110-124.

    FORRESTER, JAY W., High-Speed Electrostatic
        Storage, _Proceedings of a Symposium on
        Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 125-129.

    HAEFF, ANDREW V., The Memory Tube and
        its Application to Electronic Computation,
        _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 3, no. 24, Oct. 1948,
        pp. 281-286.

    KORNEI, OTTO, Survey of Magnetic Recording,
        _Proceedings of a Symposium on Large-Scale
        Digital Calculating Machinery_, Cambridge,
        Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948, pp. 223-237.

    MOORE, BENJAMIN L., Magnetic and Phosphor
        Coated Discs, _Proceedings of a Symposium on
        Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 130-132.

    RAJCHMAN, JAN A., The Selectron—A Tube for
        Selective Electrostatic Storage, _Mathematical
        Tables and Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 2,
        no. 20, Oct. 1947, pp. 359-361 and frontispiece.

    SHARPLESS, T. KITE, Mercury Delay Lines as
        a Memory Unit, _Proceedings of a Symposium on
        Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 103-109.

    SHEPPARD, C. BRADFORD, Transfer Between
        External and Internal Memory, _Proceedings of
        a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1948, pp. 267-273.


Programming or Coding

    EVERETT, ROBERT R., _Digital Computing
        Machine Logic_ (memorandum M-63), Cambridge,
        Mass.: Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
        Servo-mechanisms Laboratory, Mar. 19, 1947, 48 pp.

    GOLDSTINE, HERMAN H., and JOHN VON
        NEUMANN, _Planning and Coding of Problems
        for an Electronic Computing Instrument_,
        Princeton, N. J.: Institute for Advanced Study,
        1947, 69 pp.

    GOLDSTINE, HERMAN H., and JOHN VON
        NEUMANN, _Planning and Coding of Problems
        for an Electronic Computing Instrument_,
        Princeton, N. J.: Institute for Advanced Study,
        part 2, vol. 3, 1948, 23 pp.

    MAUCHLY, JOHN W., Preparation of Problems for
        Edvac-Type Machines, _Proceedings of a Symposium
        on Large-Scale Digital Calculating Machinery_,
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1948,
        pp. 203-207.


DIGITAL MACHINES—MISCELLANEOUS

Many of the following articles are nontechnical and contain much
interesting information about machines that think:

    ALT, FRANZ L., New High-Speed Computing
        Devices, _The American Statistician_, vol. 1,
        no. 1, Aug. 1947, pp. 14-15.

    BUSH, VANNEVAR, As We May Think, _Atlantic
        Monthly_, July 1945, pp. 101-108.

    CONDON, EDWARD U., _The Electronic Brain
        Means a Better Future for You_ (broadcast),
        Columbia Broadcasting System, Jan. 4, 1948.

    DAVIS, HARRY M., Mathematical Machines,
        _Scientific American_, vol. 180, no. 4,
        Apr. 1949, pp. 29-39.

    LAGEMANN, JOHN K., It All Adds Up,
        _Collier’s Magazine_, May 31, 1947,
        pp. 22-23 ...

    LOCKE, E. L., Modern Calculators,
        _Astounding Science Fiction_, vol. 52, no. 5,
        Jan. 1949, pp. 87-106.

    MACLAUGHLAN, LORNE, Electrical Mathematicians,
        _Astounding Science Fiction_, vol. 53, no. 3,
        May 1949, pp. 93-108.

    MANN, MARTIN, Want to Buy a Brain? _Popular
        Science_, vol. 154, no. 5, May 1949, pp. 148-152.

    NEWMAN, JAMES R., Custom-Built Genius, _New
        Republic_, June 23, 1947, pp. 14-18.

    PFEIFFER, JOHN E., The Machine That Plays Gin
        Rummy, _Science Illustrated_, vol. 4, no. 3,
        Mar. 1949, pp. 46-48 ...

    RIDENOUR, LOUIS N., Mechanical Brains,
        _Fortune_, vol. 39, no. 5, May 1949,
        pp. 108-118.

    TUMBLESON, ROBERT C., Calculating Machines,
        _Federal Science Progress_, June 1947, pp. 3-7.

    ANONYMOUS, Almost Human, _Home Office
        News_, Newark, N. J.: Prudential Insurance
        Company of America, Feb. 1947, p. 8.


APPLICATIONS OF DIGITAL MACHINES

Some of the problems that mechanical brains can solve, some of the
methods for controlling them to solve problems, and some of the
implications of mechanical brains for future problems are covered in
the following references:


Solving Problems

    BERKELEY, EDMUND C., Electronic Machinery for
        Handling Information, and its Uses in Insurance,
        _Transactions of the Actuarial Society of
        America_, vol. 48, May 1947, pp. 36-52.

    BERKELEY, EDMUND C., Electronic Sequence
        Controlled Calculating Machinery and Applications
        in Insurance, _Proceedings of 1947 Annual
        Conference, Life Office Management Association_,
        New York: Life Office Management Association, 1947,
        pp. 116-129.

    CURRY, HASKELL B., and WILLA A.
        WYATT, _A Study of Inverse Interpolation of
        the Eniac_, B. R. L. Report No. 615, Aberdeen,
        Md.: Ballistic Research Laboratories, Aug. 19,
        1946, 100 pp.

    HARRISON, JOSEPH O., JR., and HELEN
        MALONE, Piecewise Polynomial Approximation for
        Large-Scale Digital Calculators, _Mathematical
        Tables and Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3,
        no. 26, Apr. 1949, pp. 400-407.

    HOFFLEIT, DORRIT, A Comparison of Various
        Computing Machines Used in Reduction of Doppler
        Observations, _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids
        to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 25, Jan. 1949,
        pp. 373-377.

    LEONTIEF, WASSILY W., Computational Problems
        Arising in Connection with Economic Analysis of
        Interindustrial Relationships, _Proceedings of
        a Symposium on Large-Scale Digital Calculating
        Machinery_, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press, 1948, pp. 169-175.

    LOTKIN, MAX, _Inversion on the Eniac
        Using Osculatory Interpolation_, B. R. L.
        Report No. 632, Aberdeen, Md.: Ballistic Research
        Laboratories, July 15, 1947, 42 pp.

    LOWAN, ARNOLD N., The Computation Laboratory
        of the National Bureau of Standards, _Scripta
        Mathematica_, vol. 15, no. 1, Mar. 1949,
        pp. 33-63.

    MATZ, ADOLPH, Electronics in Accounting,
        _Accounting Review_, vol. 21, no. 4, Oct.
        1946, pp. 371-379.

    MCPHERSON, JAMES L., Applications of
        High-Speed Computing Machines to Statistical
        Work, _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids to
        Computation_, vol. 3, no. 22, Apr. 1948,
        pp. 121-126.

    MITCHELL, HERBERT F., JR., Inversion of a
        Matrix of Order 38, _Mathematical Tables and
        Other Aids to Computation_, vol. 3, no. 23,
        July 1948, pp. 161-166.

    ANONYMOUS, Revolutionizing the Office,
        _Business Week_, May 28, 1949, no. 1030,
        pp. 65-72.


Speech

Some of the possibilities of machines dealing with voice and speech are
indicated in:

    DUDLEY, HOMER, R. R. RIESZ, and
        S. S. A. WATKINS, A Synthetic Speaker,
        _Journal of the Franklin Institute_, vol. 227,
        June 1939, pp. 739-764.

        This is an article on the _Voder_, which is
        an abbreviation of _V_oice _O_peration
        _De_monstrator. The machine was exhibited at
        the New York World’s Fair, 1939.

    DUDLEY, HOMER, The Vocoder, _Bell
        Laboratories Record_, vol. 18, no. 4, Dec. 1939,
        pp. 122-126.

        This is a more general type of machine than the Voder.
        The Vocoder is both an analyzer and synthesizer of
        human speech.

    POTTER, RALPH K., GEORGE A. KOPP, and
        HARRIET C. GREEN, _Visible Speech_,
        New York: D. Van Nostrand Co., 1947, 441 pp.

    ANONYMOUS, Pedro the Voder: A Machine that
        Talks, _Bell Laboratories Record_, vol. 17,
        no. 6, Feb. 1939, pp. 170-171.


Weather

Some of the possibilities of machines dealing with weather information
are covered in:

    LAGEMANN, JOHN K., Making Weather to Order,
        _New York Herald Tribune: This Week_,
        Feb. 23, 1947.

    SHALETT, SIDNEY, Electronics to Aid Weather
        Figuring, _The New York Times_, Jan. 11, 1946.

    ZWORYKIN, V. K., _Outline of Weather
        Proposal_, Princeton, N. J.: Radio Corporation
        of America Research Laboratories, Oct. 1945, 11 pp.

    ANONYMOUS, Weather Under Control,
        _Fortune_, Feb. 1948, pp. 106-111 ...


The Robot Machine

    ČAPEK, KAREL, _R. U. R._ (translated from
        the Czech by Paul Selver), New York: Doubleday,
        Page & Co., 1923.

    LAGEMANN, JOHN K., From Piggly Wiggly to
        Keedoozle, _Collier’s Magazine_, vol. 122,
        no. 18, Oct. 30, 1948, pp. 20-21 ...

    LEAVER, E. W., and J. J. BROWN,
        Machines Without Men, _Fortune_, vol. 34,
        no. 5, Nov. 1946, pp. 165 ...

    PEASE, M. C., Devious Weapon, _Astounding
        Science Fiction_, vol. 53, no. 2, Apr. 1949,
        pp. 34-43.

    SHANNON, CLAUDE E., _Programming a Computer
        for Playing Chess_, Bell Telephone Laboratories,
        Oct. 8, 1948, 34 pp.

    SHELLEY, MARY W., _Frankenstein_ (in
        Everyman’s Library, No. 616), New York: E. P.
        Dutton & Co., last reprinted 1945, 242 pp.

    SPILHAUS, ATHELSTAN, Let Robot Work for You,
        _The American Magazine_, Dec. 1948, p. 47 ...

    ANONYMOUS, Another New Product for Robot
        Salesmen, _Modern Industry_, vol. 13, no. 2,
        Feb. 15, 1947.

    ANONYMOUS, The Automatic Factory,
        _Fortune_, vol. 34, no. 5, Nov. 1946,
        p. 160 ...

    ANONYMOUS, Machines Predict What Happens in
        Your Plant, _Business Week_, Sept. 25, 1948,
        pp. 68-69 ...




NAME INDEX

_Note: This list of persons mentioned in the text includes names of
fictional characters. The subject index, which follows, includes all
other names._


    Aiken, Howard H., 90-112, 177-8, 232, 245-6
    Alexander, Samuel N., 251
    Alquist, 200
    Alt, Franz L., 142, 237, 247, 253
    Archer, R. M., 241
    Aristotle, 152

    Babbage, Charles, 89
    Baehne, G. Walter, 232
    Bailey, C. F., 237
    Barcroft, Joseph, 229
    Beach, Frank A., 229
    Beard, R. E., 88, 240
    Berkeley, Edmund C., 233, 248, 254
    Berry, R. J. A., 229
    Berry, T. M., 240
    Bloch, Richard M., 246, 250
    Bloomfield, Leonard, 231
    Bodmer, Frederick, 231
    Boelter, L. M. K., 240
    Boole, George, 152
    Boring, Edwin G., 229
    Bower, E. C., 237
    Brainerd, J. G., 247
    Brillouin, Leon N., 252
    Brown, David R., 251
    Brown, G. S., 245
    Brown, J. J., 255
    Brown, S. L., 241-2
    Buckingham, R. A., 240
    Burkhart, William, 144, 155-6
    Burks, Arthur W., 246, 251
    Bush, Vannevar, 72, 74, 239, 241, 245, 253

    Caldwell, Samuel H., 74, 239, 241
    Campbell, Robert V. D., 249-50
    Čapek, Karel, 199, 255
    Carroll, Lewis, 12
    Carter, G. K., 244
    Cesareo, O., 248
    Clemence, G. M., 237
    Clippinger, R. F., 246
    Comrie, John Leslie, 232
    Concordia, C., 244
    Condon, Edward U., 253
    Crew, E. W., 232
    Criner, H. E., 245
    Culley, Frank L., 237
    Curry, Haskell B., 254

    Davis, Harry M., 253
    Deming, W. Edwards, 237
    Dietzold, Robert L., 244
    Domin, Harry, 199
    Dudley, Homer, 254-5
    Duncan, W. J., 244
    Dunlap, Jack W., 237
    Dwyer, Paul S., 237
    Dyer, H. S., 237

    Eckert, J. Presper, Jr., 114, 178, 247, 251
    Eckert, W. J., 233, 236-7, 239, 250
    Edison, Thomas A., 15
    Ellis, M., 250
    Enns, W. E., 243
    Everett, Robert R., 251-2

    Feinstein, Lillian, 237
    Flesch, Rudolf, 231
    Flory, L. E., 252
    Forrester, Jay W., 251-2
    Frame, J. Sutherland, 244
    Frankenstein, Victor, 198, 200
    Franz, Shepherd I., 229
    Freeland, Stephen L., 249
    Fry, Macon, 232
    Fuller, Harrison W., 252
    Fürth, R., 242

    Gage, F. D., 245
    Genet, N., 239, 246
    Godwin, Mary W. (Mary W. Shelley), 198, 255
    Goldstine, Adele, 247
    Goldstine, Herman H., 247, 251, 253
    Gove, E. L., 245
    Graff, Willem L., 231
    Graham, R. S., 244
    Gray, T. S., 245
    Green, Harriet C., 255

    Haeff, Andrew V., 252
    Hansen, Morris H., 237
    Harrison, Joseph O., Jr., 246, 254
    Hart, H. C., 244
    Hartkemeier, Harry Pelle, 233
    Hartree, D. R., 232, 240-1, 247
    Haupt, Ralph F., 237
    Hayakawa, S. I., 231
    Hazen, H. L., 243, 245
    Hedeman, W. R., 245
    Hedley, K. J., 233
    Herget, Paul, 237
    Herr, D. L., 244
    Herrick, C. Judson, 229
    Hoffleit, Dorrit, 254
    Hogben, Launcelot, 231
    Hollerith, Herman, 43
    Hopper, Grace M., 246
    Horsburgh, E. H., 232
    Hotelling, Harold, 237
    Householder, Alston S., 230

    Jespersen, Otto, 231
    Juley, Joseph, 248

    Kalin, Theodore A., 144, 155-6
    Kelvin, Lord, 72, 240
    King, Gilbert W., 238
    Koons, Florence, 249
    Kopp, George A., 255
    Kormes, Jennie P., 238
    Kormes, Mark, 238
    Kornei, Otto, 252
    Kranz, Frederick W., 242
    Kron, Gabriel, 243-4
    Kuder, G. Frederic, 238
    Kuehni, H. P., 240, 243

    Lagemann, John K., 253, 255
    Landahl, Herbert D., 230
    Lang, H. C., 233
    Lashley, Karl S., 229
    Leaver, E. W., 255
    Leontief, Wassily W., 254
    Lettvin, Jerome Y., 230
    Lilley, S., 232
    Livingston, Hubert M., 250
    Locke, E. L., 253
    Lorraine, R. G., 243
    Lotkin, Max, 254
    Loud, Warren S., 251
    Lowan, Arnold N., 254
    Lubkin, Samuel, 249, 251
    Lyndon, Roger C., 250

    MacLaughlan, Lorne, 253
    Maginniss, F. J., 241
    Mallock, R. R. M., 244
    Malone, Helen, 254
    Mann, Martin, 253
    Marble, F. G., 242
    Massey, H. S. W., 240
    Mastukazi, Kiyoshi, 19
    Matz, Adolph, 254
    Mauchly, John W., 114, 178, 247, 251, 253
    Maxfield, D. K., 238
    Maxwell, L. R., 242
    McCann, G. D., 245
    McCulloch, Warren S., 230
    McLaughlin, Kathleen, 238
    McPherson, James L., 254
    McPherson, John C., 238
    Meacham, Alan D., 237
    Mercner, R. O., 244
    Miller, Dayton C., 242
    Miller, Frederick G., 249
    Milliman, Wendell A., 238
    Milne, J. R., 242
    Mitchell, Herbert F., Jr., 254
    Montgomery, H. C., 242
    Moore, Benjamin L., 252
    Moore, C. R., 242
    Murray, Francis J., 232
    Myers, D. M., 245

    Newman, James R., 253

    Ogden, C. K., 231
    O’Neal, R. D., 252

    Parker, W. W., 243
    Patterson, George W., 251
    Pease, M. C., 255
    Pekeris, C. L., 245
    Peterson, H. A., 240, 243-4
    Pfeiffer, John E., 253
    Pieron, Henri, 229
    Pike, W. S., 252
    Pitts, Walter, 230
    Poesch, H., 240
    Porter, A., 240-1
    Potter, Ralph K., 255
    Pringle, R. W., 242

    Quine, W. V., 248

    Rajchman, Jan A., 252
    Rashevsky, N., 230
    Raymond, W. J., 242
    Reichenbach, Hans, 248
    Renwick, W., 249
    Ridenour, Louis N., 253
    Riesz, R. R., 254
    Robertson, J. M., 242
    Rose, A., 247
    Rossum, 199
    Royer, Elmer B., 238

    Sauer, R., 240
    Schlauch, Margaret, 231
    Schnackel, H. G., 233
    Schrödinger, Erwin, 229
    Schwarzchild, Martin, 237
    Shalett, Sidney, 255
    Shannon, Claude E., 153-5, 241, 248, 255
    Sharpless, T. Kite, 252
    Shelley, Mary W., 198, 255
    Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 198
    Sheppard, C. Bradford, 252
    Sherrington, Charles S., 229
    Smith, C. E., 245
    Snyder, Frances E., 250
    Somerville, J. M., 242
    Spilhaus, Athelstan, 255
    Stewart, R. R., 245
    Stibitz, George R., 129-30, 244, 251
    Straiton, A. W., 242

    Tabor, Lewis P., 247
    Tarski, Alfred, 248-9
    Terhune, G. K., 242
    Thomas, George B., 238
    Thomson, James, 240
    Thomson, William, 72, 240
    Tilney, Frederick, 229
    Torrey, V., 246
    Travis, Irven, 239, 244
    Tumbleson, Robert C., 253
    Turck, J. A. V., 232
    Tyler, Arthur W., 252

    Varney, R. N., 243
    von Neumann, John, 124, 251

    Wainwright, Lawrence L., 72, 241
    Walpole, Hugh R., 231
    Watkins, S. S. A., 254
    Wegel, R. L., 242
    Weiner, J. R., 251
    Wheeler, L. L., 241-2
    Whitten, C. A., 238
    Wiener, Norbert, 229
    Wilbur, J. B., 244
    Wilkes, M. V., 249
    Williams, Samuel B., 248
    Wolf, Arthur W., 233
    Womersley, J. R., 241
    Wood, Thomas, 19
    Woodger, J. H., 248
    Woodruff, L. F., 250
    Wyatt, Willa A., 254
    Wylie, J., 240

    Yavne, R. O., 245

    Zworykin, V. K., 190, 252, 255




SUBJECT INDEX

_Notes: Phrases consisting of an adjective and a noun, or of a noun
and a noun, are entered in their alphabetical place according to the
first word. For example, “electrostatic storage tube” is under_ e, _and
“punch card” is under_ p.


    _A_ field, 99
    _A_ tape, 82-3
    abacus, 17-9, 133, 220
    _abax_ (Greek), 18
    absolute value, 101, 222
    accumulator, 115-6
    accumulator decade, 118
    accuracy, 67, 89
    acetylcholine, 3
    add output, 120
    addend, 223
    adder, 77
    adder mechanism, 77-8
    adding, 24-5, 27, 37, 55, 100, 119, 139
    addition circuit, 37
    Aiken Mark I Calculator, 10, 89-112, 245-6;
      _see also_ Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled
                      Calculator
    Aiken Mark II Relay Calculator, 176-8, 249
    Aiken Mark III Electronic Calculator, 177
    air resistance coefficient, 80-2
    algebra of logic, 26, 36, 56-62, 105, 140, 151-2, 164, 221-3, 248
    algebraic equations, machines for solving, 244
    all-or-none response, 3
    alphabet, 14
    alphabetic coding, 13, 54
    alphabetic punching, 46
    alphabetic writing, 13
    amplify, 73
    analogous, 65
    analogue, 65
    analogue machines (machines that handle information
                       expressed as measurements),        65;
      MIT Differential Analyzer No. 2, 65-88;
      references, 239-45
    analytical engine, 90
    analyzer, 68, 241-4;
      _see also_ differential analyzer
    and, 146-8
    and/or, 149
    angle-indicator, 74-5
    animal thinking, 4, 8, 188
    annuities, 88
    antecedent, 158
    antilogarithm, 139, 226
    antitangent, 139, 226
    approximation, 220;
      _see also_ rapid approximation
    aptitude testing, 190
    argument (in a mathematical table or function),
              96, 103-4, 122, 136, 224
    arithmetical operations, 55-6, 173
    armor with a motor, 180, 195
    array, 173, 227
    Atomic Energy Commission, 203, 208
    attitudes, 205
    augend, 223
    _aut_ (Latin), 149
    automatic address-book, 181
    automatic carriage, 53
    “Automatic Computing Machinery”
           (section in _Mathematical Tables and Other Aids
            to Computation_),                               177
    automatic control: house-furnace, 189;
      lawn-mower, 188;
      tractor-plow, 188;
      weather, 189
    automatic cook, 181
    automatic factory, 189
    automatic library, 9, 181
    automatic machinery, 182
    automatic pilot, 189
    automatic recognizer, 186-7
    automatic sequence-controlled calculator, 90;
      _see also_ Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled
                      Calculator
    automatic stenographer, 185
    automatic switching circuits, 248
    automatic translator, 182
    automatic typist, 182, 184
    axon, 3

    _B_ field, 99
    _B_ tape, 82-3
    Ballistic Research Laboratories, 1, 113-5, 127-8, 132, 142
    base _e_, 226
    base 10, 226
    beam of electrons, 172
    behavior, 4, 7-8, 29
    Bell Telephone Laboratories, 4-5, 128-43, 247-8
    Bell Telephone Laboratories’ general-purpose relay computer,
              128-43, 247-8;
      cost, 142;
      reliability, 141;
      speed, 142
    Bessel functions, 111, 226
    Binac, 179
    binary coding, 11, 13
    binary digit, 14
    binary numbers, 14, 216-9
    biophysics, 230
    biquinary numbers, 133, 219-20
    blocks of arguments, 137
    Boolean algebra, 152, 248;
      _see also_ mathematical logic
    both, 149
    bowwow theory, 12
    brain evolution, 229
    brain with a motor, 180, 195
    BTL frames, 138-9
    bus, 32, 119
    button, 91, 94

    _C_ field, 99
    _C_ tape, 82-3
    _calcis_ (Latin), 18
    calculating punch, 47, 51-2, 235
    calculator frames, 138
    calculator programmed by punch cards, 236
    cam, 94-5
    cam contact, 91, 94-5
    capacitance, 117
    capacitor, 117
    capacity: counter, 59;
      selecting, 59
    carbon dioxide, 190
    card channel, 47, 52
    card column, 48
    card feed, 48, 91
    card punch, 91, 97
    card reader, 116, 118
    card sorter, 96
    card stacker, 48
    card station, 47
    Carnegie Institution of Washington, 113
    carry impulse, 118
    cell nucleus, 2-3
    census, 43, 53
    channel, 47, 52, 170
    characteristic of a logarithm, 107
    check counter, 105
    check-marks, 151
    checking, 105, 110, 179, 227
    chess game, 117
    chestnut blight, 201
    chortle, 12
    class selector, 59
    clearing, 100
    codes, 29, 54, 96, 99
    coding, 30, 130, 252-3
    coding line, 99
    column (in a punch card), 45
    connective, 148, 158-9
    connective grouping, 159
    collating, 51, 173
    collator, 47, 51, 235
    collator counting device, 51, 235
    combining information, 15
    combining operations, 173
    Common, 59-60
    comparer, 57-8
    comparing, 50, 57-8
    complement, 55;
      _see also_ nines complement, ones complement,
                      tens complement
    Complex Computer, 129-30
    complex numbers, 128-9
    computer, 6, 27
    Computer 1 and Computer 2, 132, 138
    conflicts between statements, 149-50
    consequent, 158
    constant, 224
    constant ratio, 77
    constant register, 96, 99
    constant switch, 99
    Constant Transmitter, 116, 118
    consulting a table, 103, 122
    convergent, 221
    Converter, 115
    context, 144
    continuous annuities, 88
    continuous contingent insurances, 88
    continuously running gear, 93
    control, 6, 28, 90-1
    control brushes, 51-2
    control frames, 138-9
    Control Instrument Company, 43
    control over robot machines, 196-208
    control tape, 28
    controversy, 197
    cosine, 75, 85, 139, 226
    cost of mechanical brains, 87, 109, 126, 142, 165, 168
    counter, 52, 74, 93-4
    counter position, 93
    counter wheel, 93, 118
    counting, 55
    coupling (numbers), 106
    cube, 105, 224
    Current (input of comparer), 57
    cycle, 29, 45
    Cycling Unit, 115-6
    Cypriote, 13

    Dartmouth College, 131
    decade, 118
    decimal digit, 11, 14
    decimal position, 118
    deciphering, 184, 188
    decoding, 184, 188
    definite integral, 111, 225
    delay lines, 17, 20, 171-2
    dendrite, 3
    denial, 147
    dependent variable, 81, 224
    derivative, 68-71, 225
    design of mechanical brains, 167-79, 251
    desk calculating machines, 4, 11, 17, 19
    detail cards, 50
    dial switch, 92, 95-6
    dial telephone, 17, 19, 128
    differences, 110, 227
    differential, 68, 70, 78
    differential analyzer, 68, 72-88, 239-41
    Differential Analyzer No. 2, 65-88;
      accuracy, 86;
      cost, 87;
      reliability, 87;
      speed, 87
    differential equation, 68-9, 71, 111, 141, 225-6
    differential function, 70
    differential gear assembly, 78
    digit, 11, 14
    Digit Pickup, 60
    digit selector, 60
    digit tray, 119
    digit trunk lines, 119
    digit trunks, 119
    digital machines
       (machines that handle information expressed
           as digits or letters):
      Bell Laboratories’ general-purpose relay calculator, 128-43;
      Eniac, 113-27;
      Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator, 89-112;
      punch-card calculating machinery, 42-64;
      references, 232-9, 245-55
    directions, 24
    disc, 78-80
    discrimination, 140
    discriminator, 140-1
    distance, 68-9
    distinguishing _A_ and _H_, 184
    dividend, 103, 223
    Divider-Square-Rooter, 115-7
    dividing, 55-6, 98, 102, 121, 140
    divisor counter, 102
    doorpost, 65-6
    doubling, 76-7, 100
    doubling mechanism, 76-7
    drafting rules, 149
    drag coefficient, 80
    drive, 86
    Dry Ice, 190

    echo, 171
    Eckert-Mauchly Computer Corporation, 179, 250
    economic relations, 194
    Edsac, 249
    “educated” machine, 101
    Edvac, 177, 249
    Egyptian, 12
    either, 149
    electric charge, 172
    electric remote-control accounting, 250
    electric typewriter, 91, 97, 236
    electromagnet, 168
    Electronic Binary Automatic Computer, 179
    electronic calculating punch, 236
    Electronic Control Company, 250
    Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (Eniac),
               113-27, 246-7;
      _see also_ Eniac
    electronic tubes, 17, 20-1, 178-9;
      Cathode, 21;
      Grid, 21;
      Plate, 21
    electrostatic storage tube, 17, 20, 172
    11 position, 45
    11 punch, 58
    else, 146-7
    end-around-carry, 95, 217, 223
    engine, 90
    Eniac, 113-27, 246-7;
      cost, 126;
      panels, 115;
      reliability, 126;
      speed, 125;
      unbalance, 124
    “enough alike,” 184
    Equal (output of sequencer), 61-2
    equation, 68, 225
    equivalent, 14
    erase key, 134
    Etruscan, 188
    explanation, 209-13
    explicit equation, 86
    exponential, 85, 106, 225-6
    extraction, 222

    falsity, 147
    farad, 117
    fingers, 16, 18
    fire-control instrument, 17, 19, 67, 131
    5 impulse, 56
    flights, 70
    flip-flop, 119
    following logically, 145
    form feeding device, 236
    formal logic, 152
    formula, 68, 70, 224
    Frankenstein’s monster, 198
    function, 68, 70, 81, 103, 116, 118, 224
    function table, 80-1, 116, 118

    gang punching, 50
    gearbox, 77-8
    General Electric A.C. Network Analyzer, 243
    General Electric Company, 243
    geographic code, 54
    giant brain, 1, 5-8
    globe, 65-6
    graph, 81
    great circle, 69
    greater-than, 25-7, 37, 222
    greater-than circuit, 37
    Greek letters, 120
    guided missile, 197, 206
    gun, 69

    hail storm, 190
    hand perforator, 132, 134
    handling information, 10-18
    harmonic analyzers, 241-2
    harmonic synthesizers, 241-2
    Harvard Computation Laboratory, 89, 176-7, 245, 249
    Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator (Mark I),
               10, 89-112, 245-6;
      cost, 109;
      efficiency, 111;
      reliability, 110;
      speed, 109
    Harvard Sequence-Controlled Electronic Calculator (Mark III), 177
    Harvard Sequence-Controlled Relay Calculator (Mark II), 176-8, 249
    Harvard University, 1, 4, 8, 89, 176-7, 245, 249
    hatred, 206
    hoppers, 51
    hub, 46, 98
    human brain, 2-4, 16, 229
    humidity, 63

    IBM (International Business Machines),
               43-64, 89-90, 177, 233-9, 249-50
    IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator, 10, 89-112, 245-6;
      _see also_ Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled
                      Calculator
    IBM card-programmed calculator, 236
    IBM pluggable sequence relay calculator, 236
    IBM punch-card machinery, 43-64, 233-9
    IBM Selective-Sequence Electronic Calculator, 177-9, 249
    ideographic writing, 12
    if, 146-7
    if ... then, 149
    ignorance, 205
    illness, 191-2
    imitative scheme, 12
    in-code, 99
    in-field, 99
    independent variable, 81, 224
    infinity, 86, 133, 212, 225
    information, 10
    initial conditions, 83, 225
    Initiating Unit, 115-6
    input, 6, 90-1
    input devices, 175, 251-2
    input register, 27
    instantaneous rate of change, 70-1
    Institute of Advanced Study, 124
    instructions, 28, 83, 97, 178-9
    insurance company, 42
    insurance policies, 42
    insurance values, 88
    integral, 68, 71-2, 225
    integral sign, 85, 225
    integrating, 71-2, 78
    integrator, 78-80
    integrator mechanism, 78-9
    International Business Machines Corporation (IBM), 43;
      _see_ IBM
    International Hydrographic Bureau, 242
    International Phonetic Alphabet, 13
    interpolating, 131, 221
    interposing, 102
    interpreter, 47, 49, 235
    interpreting, 49
    interval, 68, 70
    intuitive thinking, 8
    inverse, 71

    judgments, 191

    Kalin-Burkhart Logical-Truth Calculator, 144-66, 248;
      cost, 165;
      reliability, 166;
      speed, 166
    key punch, 47-8, 96, 235
    keyboard, 48
    knots, 17

    language of logic, 56-62, 105, 140;
      _see also_ mathematical logic
    languages, 10-21, 231
    latch relay, 40-1
    left-hand components, 56, 121, 215
    library, 9, 181
    Library of Congress, 15
    lie detector, 192
    line of coding, 99
    linear, 224-5
    linear interpolation, 221
    linear simultaneous equations, 141, 225
    lobe, 94-5
    logarithm, 67, 85, 106-8, 139, 225
    Logarithm-In-Out counter, 107
    logic, 144;
      _see also_ mathematical logic
    logical choice, 4;
      _see also_ mathematical logic
    logical connective, 148, 222
    logical operations, 56-62, 173
    logical pattern, 145-6
    logical truth, 144-56, 166
    Logical-Truth Calculator, 144-66;
      _see_ Kalin-Burkhart Logical-Truth Calculator
    loopholes, 149
    Low Primary (output of sequencer), 61-2
    Low Secondary (output of sequencer), 61-2
    Lower Brushes, 52
    loxodrome, 69-70

    machine call number, 99
    machine cycle, 56
    machine language, 29, 99, 175, 191
    machines as a language for thinking, 19-20;
      references, 231-2
    machines involving voice and speech, 185-6, 254
    magnetic surfaces, 17, 20, 168-70, 179
    magnetic tape, 169-70, 179
    magnetic wire, 168
    magnetized spot, 168-70
    main connective, 160
    many-wire cable, 50
    Mark I (Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled Calculator),
               10, 89-112, 245-6;
      _see also_ Harvard IBM Automatic Sequence-Controlled
                      Calculator
    Mark II (Harvard Sequence-Controlled Relay Calculator), 176-8, 249
    Mark III (Harvard Sequence-Controlled Electronic Calculator), 177
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1, 20, 65, 72-88, 153
    Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Differential
               Analyzer No. 2, 65-88;
      accuracy, 86;
      cost, 87;
      reliability, 87;
      speed, 87
    master card, 50
    Master Programmer, 115-6
    matching, 173
    mathematical biophysics, 230
    mathematical logic, 26, 36, 56-62, 105, 140, 151-2, 164, 221-3, 248
    matrices, 173, 227
    matrix, 173, 227
    meanings, 209, 231
    measurements, 65-6, 68
    mechanical brain, 1, 5-8, 20;
      crucial devices for, 20
    mechanical brains under construction, 176-9
    memory, 27, 90-1
    mentality, 24, 27
    mercury tank, 171, 179
    merging, 173
    metal fingers, 135
    mica, 172
    microphone, 185
    mimeograph stencil, 16
    Minoan, 188
    miscellaneous field, 99
    mistake, 134
    Moore School of Electrical Engineering, 7, 113-27, 177, 249
    multiplicand, 223
    multiplicand counter, 101
    multiplication schemes, 214-6
    multiplier, 115-6
    multiplier counter, 101
    multiply-divide unit, 103
    multiplying, 55-6, 101, 121, 140
    multiplying punch, 47, 52, 235

    National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, 128, 132
    Naval Proving Ground, 177
    negation, 24-5, 27, 34-6
    negation circuit, 36
    negative, 147
    negative digit, 215
    neon bulb, 119
    nerve, 2-4
    nerve cell, 2, 3, 16
    nerve fiber, 2, 3
    nerve networks, 230
    nervous system, 188
    network analyzers, 242-4
    neurosis, 191
    nine-pulses, 120-1
    nines complement, 95, 121, 223
    No X, 59
    Northrop Aircraft, Inc., 179
    not, 146-8
    numeric coding, 13, 54
    numerical X position, 45
    numerical Y position, 45

    occupation code, 54
    octal notation, 179, 219
    ohm, 117
    Ojibwa, 12
    ones complement, 217
    only, 146-7
    operation code, 103
    operations with numbers, 24-7
    or, 146-9
    organization of digital machines, 251
    out-code, 99
    out-field, 99
    output, 6, 90-1, 251-2
    output devices, 176, 251-2
    output register, 27

    paper channel, 52
    partial differential equations, 87
    partial products, 115, 214
    Pearl Assurance Company, 88
    pebbles, 17-8
    pen with a motor, 180, 195
    permanent table frames, 138-9
    personal income tax, 141
    phonetic writing, 13
    phonograph, 15-6
    phonographic writing, 13
    phototube, 81-2, 183-4
    physical equipment for handling information, 11, 15-21, 91
    physical problems, 69-72
    physical quantities, 67-9
    pictographic writing, 12
    plugboard, 46, 98
    plug-in units, 117-8
    point of view, 207
    pooh-pooh theory, 12
    position (in a punch card), 45
    position frames, 138-9
    power, 43, 65, 133, 216, 224
    prejudice, 205
    Previous (input of comparer), 57
    Primary (input of sequencer), 61-2
    Primary Brushes, 51, 62
    Primary Feed, 51, 61
    Primary Sequence Brushes, 51
    printer, 137
    printer frames, 138
    problem frames, 138
    problem position, 132, 135
    problem tape, 134
    processor, 132, 134, 175
    product, 70, 102, 223
    product counter, 102
    production scheduling, 193
    program, 122, 173, 252-3
    program-control switch, 123
    program pulse, 122
    program-pulse input terminal, 123
    program register, 38
    program tape, 28-9
    program trays, 119
    program trunk lines, 119
    programming method of von Neumann, 124
    pronoun, 223
    psychological testing, 190
    psychological trainer, 191-2
    pulses, 120, 171
    punch card, 17, 44-5, 95, 97
    punch-card column, 45
    punch-card machinery, 17, 20, 42-64, 232-9;
      cost, 63;
      reliability, 63-4;
      speed, 62-3
    punch feed, 51-2
    punched paper tape, 17, 23, 82, 95
    punching channel, 50
    punching dies, 48, 51-2
    pyramid circuit, 39

    quantity of information, 11, 14-15
    quartz, 171
    quotient, 98, 103

    _R.U.R._, 199
    radar, 183
    railroad line, 6, 119
    rapid approximation, 106-8, 220-1
    rate of change, 68, 70-1
    ratio, 77, 83
    Raytheon Computer, 250
    reading, 57
    reading brushes, 51-2
    reading channel, 50
    reading of punch cards, 44
    reasoning, 144
    rebus-writing, 13
    reciprocal, 85, 224
    recognizing, 8, 182-5
    recorder, 132, 137
    rectifier, 32
    referent, 12
    register, 27
    reject, 49
    relay, 17, 20-1, 23, 92, 129, 133, 178;
      Common, 21;
      Ground, 21;
      Normally Closed, 21;
      Normally Open, 21;
      Pickup, 21
    release key, 48
    reliability, 63-4, 110, 126, 128, 141-2, 166, 168, 174
    Remington-Rand, 43
    reperforator, 137
    rephrasing, 163-4
    reproducer, 47, 49-50, 235
    reproducing, 49
    reset code, 100
    resetting, 100
    resistance, 80, 117
    resistance coefficient, 80
    resistor, 117
    right-hand components, 56, 121, 215
    robot machine, 197, 198-208, 255
    robot salesman, 201
    _robota_ (Czech), 199
    Roman numerals, 212;
      ancient style, 219
    room, 70
    Rossum’s Universal Robots, 199
    rounding off, 55-6
    routine, 8, 167, 173
    routine frames, 138-9
    routine tape, 28, 134
    rules, 191, 224

    satisfy, 225
    scale factor, 74, 86
    schemes for expressing meanings, 11-15
    screen, 172
    screw, 78
    Secondary (input of sequencer), 61-2
    Secondary Brushes, 51, 62
    Secondary Feed, 61
    Select-Receiving-Register circuit, 39
    selecting, 26, 58, 104
    selection, 26-7, 38, 222
    selection circuit, 38
    selection counter, 104
    selector, 58-60
    sensing digits, 108
    separation sign, 129
    sequence-control tape, 98
    sequence-control-tape code, 98
    sequence-controlled, 89
    sequence-tape feed, 98
    sequencer, 61
    sequencing, 61
    shifting, 217
    short-cut multiplication, 215-6
    Simon, 22-40
    simultaneous, 225
    simultaneous equations, 85, 225
    sine, 75, 85, 106, 139, 226
    sink (of a circuit), 154
    slab, 18
    slide rule, 65, 67
    smoothness, 110, 227
    social control, types, 203
    sorter, 47-9
    sorting, 57, 173
    soundtracks, 16, 18
    source (of a circuit), 154
    space key, 48
    speedometer, 68
    spelling rules, 185
    spoken English, 11
    square, 224
    square matrix, 227
    square root, 116-7, 173, 220, 224
    Start Key, 98
    statements, 26, 144-51
    static electricity, 63
    storage, 6
    storage counter, 93
    storage devices, 252
    storage register, 28, 93
    storing information, 15
    storing register frames, 138
    storing registers, 139
    string, 65-6
    stylus, 16
    subroutine, 106
    Subsidiary Sequence Mechanism, 90, 106
    subtract output, 120
    subtracting, 55, 100, 119, 139, 223
    subtracting by adding, 223
    summary punch, 50, 116, 119
    summary-punching, 50
    switch open and current flowing, 154
    switchboard, 76
    switches in parallel, 154
    switches in series, 154
    switching circuits, 155
    syllable-writing, 13
    syllables, 211
    syllogism, 146, 152
    symbolic logic, 221-3, 248;
      _see also_ mathematical logic
    symbolic writing, 12
    synapse, 3
    System of Electric Remote-Control Accounting, 250
    systems for handling information, 10

    table tape, 134
    tables (of values), 103, 136, 224
    tabular value, 136, 224
    tabulator, 47, 52, 119, 235
    tallies, 17
    tangent, 105, 226
    tank (armored), 180, 195
    tank (mercury tank), 171, 179
    tape-controlled carriage, 236
    tape feed, 91, 178-9
    tape punch, 91, 97-8, 137
    tape reels, 170
    tape transmitter, 135, 137
    telegraph line, 6, 119
    telephone central station, 138
    teletype, 17
    teletype transmitter, 133, 135
    teletypewriter, 130, 137
    ten-position relay, 91-3
    ten-position switch, 91-2
    ten-pulses, 120-1
    tens complement, 224
    test scoring machine, 236
    then, 146-7
    thermostat, 187
    thinking, 1-5, 10, 97
    timed electrical currents, 44
    timing contact, 94
    tolerances, 67, 105
    torque, 73, 86
    torque amplifier, 73
    trajectories, 69, 114, 141
    transfer circuit, 33
    transferring, 31, 34, 100, 119, 167
    translating, 57
    transmitter, 74
    triggering control, 183, 186-7
    trigonometric tables, 226
    trigonometric tangent, 105, 226
    truth, 144
    truth table, 147, 155, 222
    truth value, 26, 58, 105, 147, 222
    tuning, 183
    turning force, 72
    12 position, 45
    two-position relay, 21, 91-2;
      _see also_ relay
    two-position switch, 91-2
    typewriter, 16, 18
    typewriter carriage, 53

    unattended operation, 174
    understanding, 212-3, 231
    unemployment, 201-2
    Unequal (output of comparer), 57
    unit of information, 11, 14-5, 169
    United Nations, 203, 208
    United States Army Ordnance Department, 113-4
    Univac, 250
    University of Pennsylvania, 7, 113
    unknowns, 141
    Upper Brushes, 52

    value tape code, 96
    value tape feed, 95-6
    variables, 84, 223
    _vel_ (Latin), 149
    verifier, 47-8, 235
    vibration, 69
    Vocoder, 255
    Voder, 254
    voltage, 74

    Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory, 239
    weather control, 189, 255
    weather forecasting, 189, 255
    wheel (of a counter), 78
    white elephant, 73, 114
    winch, 73
    words for explaining, 209-12

    X, 59
    X distributor, 59
    X Pickup, 59
    X punch, 45, 58
    X selector, 59

    zero, 133, 212
    _zh_ (sound), 13, 185
    Zuse Computer, 250

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 68991 ***
